---
id: 2
state: approved
created: 2018-08-23
placement:
  category: meta
  order: 20
---

# AIP Numbering

The AIP system provides a mechanism to index and have a single source of truth
for API Improvement Proposals, as well as iterate on them collaboratively and
transparently.

This document describes the AIP numbering system.

## Assigning AIP Numbers

The AIP editors (see [AIP-1](./0001.md)) are responsible for assigning a number
to each AIP when it is accepted as a draft for review. Importantly, _all_ AIPs
have numbers, not just approved ones. The [AIP Index](/) clearly delineates
which AIPs are approved and binding and which are under discussion.

The editors may decide to reserve a specific block of numbers for groups of
AIPs that are related in some way (for example, that are only scoped to a
specific subset of APIs).

Beyond this, AIP numbers are assigned arbitrarily. In general, the editors will
take the next AIP number off of the stack to assign to a draft AIP, but
occasionally may use a special/joke number if useful for mnemonic or other
reasons.

## AIP Blocks

Currently recognized blocks of AIP numbers are:

### Generally Applicable

- **1-99:** Reserved for meta-AIPs (generally process-related).
- **100-999:** General API design guidance

### Google Product Areas

- **2700-2799:** Apps (Google Workspace)
- **2500-2599:** Cloud
- **3000-3099:** Actions on Google
- **3200-3299:** Firebase
- **4100-4199:** Auth libraries
- **4200-4299:** Client libraries
- **4600-4699:** Geo

### Kolla Product Areas
- **9001-9099:** General Kolla Guidance

To request a block for a specific team that is publishing API guidance or
documentation germane to that specific team, reach out to api-editors@.

## Changelog

- **2019-10-03:** The 3000-3099 block was assigned to Actions on Google.
- **2019-01-26:** The general API design guidance block was expanded to include
  100-199.
- **2018-10-24:** The 4600-4699 block was assigned to Google Geo.
- **2018-10-02:** The 2500-2599 block was assigned to Google Cloud Platform.
- **2018-10-02:** The 2700-2799 block was assigned to Google Workspace.
