---
id: 3
state: approved
created: 2023-03-28
placement:
  category: meta
  order: 30
---

# AIP Versioning

This AIP defines the versioning scheme of the AIPs.

## Guidance

- The AIPs **must** be versioned by date, using the [ISO-8601 format of
  `YYYY-MM-DD`](https://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime), that corresponds to the
  date the version was added.
- AIPs versions **must** be available as a tag on the source control mechanism
  used to store the AIPs, of the format `v{version}`. Example: `v2023-03-28`.
- The AIPs **must** have a new version when there is a significant change to
  one or more AIPs.
- Each AIP **must** include a changelog section, with the date the change was
  made and a short description.

## Appendix

As the AIPs continue to evolve, it is beneficial for
the AIPs to have a way to denote older versions of the
specification to serve as a reference point for APIs
to explain the rationale of their design choices.

This becomes especially critical as AIPs can sometimes
reverse guidance, or include an updated design pattern
that may not look similar to the original pattern.

### Rationale for date-based versioning

- Date-based versioning allows for a simple heuristic to correlate the version
  of AIPs an API followed (look at the date of the API change, then look at the
  AIP version published right before that date).
  - The changelog can be used to provide more information about when an AIP was
    changed.
- Daily granularity enables multiple changes to be published in a single month.

### Why not individually versioned AIPs

An alternative to a universal version is having specific versions attached to
each AIP.

This approach was not opted due to the fact that the AIPs often cross-link and
depend on the rules in others (e.g. many rely on the resource-oriented AIPs).
Therefore linking to a specific version of a single AIP would not be a complete
set of guidance that could be referenced.