---
id: 8
state: approved
created: 2019-05-28
placement:
  category: meta
  order: 40
---

# AIP Style and Guidance

AIP stands for **API Improvement Proposal**, which is a design document
providing high-level, concise documentation for API design and development. The
goal is for these documents to serve as the source of truth for API-related
documentation at Google and the way API teams discuss and come to consensus on
API guidance.

AIPs are most useful when they are clear and concise, and cover a single topic
or inquiry well. In the same way that AIPs describe consistent patterns and
style for use in APIs, they also _follow_ consistent patterns and style.

## Guidance

- AIPs **must** cover a single, discrete topic, and provide clear, actionable
  guidance.
- AIPs **must not** duplicate or contradict guidance in another AIP.
- AIPs **may** also cover what _not_ to do, but **should not** cover _only_
  anti-patterns.
- If AIP guidance is conditional (e.g. a design pattern such as Jobs), the
  guidance **must** clearly explain under what conditions the guidance should be
  followed.

Guidance contained within an AIP **must** be beneficial to one or more
types of clients or their authors, including but not limited to:

- Asset inventories which can be used to audit and analyze resources.
- Command line interfaces for exploration and simple automation.
- Custom controllers (e.g. auto-scalers) which poll live state and adjust
  resource configuration accordingly.
- [IaC][] clients for orchestration and automation of multiple resources.
- Recommendation tools which provide guidance on which APIs are useful for
  specific use cases, and how to use them.
- SDKs to interact with an API from a programming language, often used heavily
  for data-plane operations.
- Security orchestration, automation, and remediation tools.
- Simple scripts to automate or orchestrate tasks.
- Test frameworks.
- Tools that operate on resource data at rest.
- Visual User Interfaces for visualization and one-off manual actions.
- Users.

Examples of improvements include:

- Requiring new proto annotations that enable more descriptive interfaces on
  clients (e.g. requiring `singular` and `plural` on a `google.api.resource`
  annotation).

AIP guidance **must not** be a significant detriment to a client's usability or
implementation difficulty, or maintenance difficulty.

Examples of detriments include:

- Introduction of a non-uniform pattern in a standard method such that all
  clients must introduce additional code without sufficient benefit (e.g. List
  behaves like this *except* for resources that start with the name Foo).
- Renames of well-established fields for minor improvements in readability (e.g.
  rename `expire_time` to `lapse_time` since `lapse` is a common term in my
  service).

While the length of AIPs will necessarily vary based on the complexity of the
question, most AIPs **should** be able to cover their content in roughly two
printed pages.

### File structure

AIPs **must** be written in Markdown, and **must** be named using their
four-digit number (example: `0008.md`). AIPs that serve a specific scope
**must** be in the subdirectory for that scope.

AIPs **must** have appropriate front matter.

```yaml
---
id: 8
state: reviewing
created: 2019-05-28
permalink: /8
redirect_from:
  - /08
  - /008
  - /0008
---

```

Front matter for AIPs **must** include:

- The `aip` key:
  - `id`: Required. The ID for the given AIP, as an integer.
  - `state`: Required. The current state of the AIP, in all lower-case. The
    valid states are listed in [AIP-1][], and common states are `draft`,
    `reviewing`, and `approved`.
  - `created`: Required. The ISO-8601 date (`yyyy-mm-dd`) when the AIP was
    originally drafted, with no quotes.
  - `updated`: The ISO-8601 date (`yyyy-mm-dd`) when the AIP was last revised.
  - `scope`: The scope for the AIP. This **must** match the directory name for
    that scope. Required for AIPs with IDs >= 1000, prohibited otherwise.
- The `permalink` key (required): This **must** be set to
  `/{aip.scope}/{aip.id}`. If there is no scope, use `/{aip.id}` instead.
- The `redirect_from` key: This should include a list of any `/{aip.id}`
  permutations that a reader would be likely to enter, including:
  - `/{aip.id}` (for AIPs where the permalink includes the scope)
  - AIP IDs with zero-padding, for each level of zero-padding up to four digits
    (for example: `/08`, `/008`, `/0008`).

### Document structure

AIPs **must** begin with a top-level heading with the AIP's title (`# Title`).
The title **should** be a noun (not an imperative). For example, "Bad API
precedents" not "Avoid breaking API precedent".

AIPs **should** then begin with an introduction (with no additional heading),
followed by a `## Guidance` heading. If necessary, the AIP **may** include any
of the following after the guidance, in the following order:

- "Further reading" is a bulleted list of links to other AIPs that are useful to
  fully understand the current AIP.
- "Appendices" covering further explanation in the same AIP. These are
  relatively rare but are important in cases where an AIP requires a lot of
  justification for the decision. Often this is primarily an explanation of
  alternatives considered to help explain the guidance.
- "Changelog" is a bulleted list of changes made to the AIP since the first
  writing.

The guidance section **may** include subsections that elaborate further on
details. Subsections will automatically create an entry in the table of
contents, and an anchor for citations.

Below is an example AIP shell that uses each major section:

```md
# AIP title

The introductory text explains the background and reason why the AIP exists. It
lays out the basic question, but does not tell the reader what to do.

## Guidance

The "guidance" section helps the reader know what to do. A common format for
the guidance section is a high-level imperative, followed by an example,
followed by a bulleted list explaining the example.

### Subsection

Individual subsections can be cited individually, and further elaborate
details.

## Rationale

The "rationale" section is optional, and helps the reader understand the
motivation behind specific guidance within the AIP.

Deeper explanations of design justification and tradeoffs **must** be in the
rationale instead of other sections, to ensure the rest of the document acts as
an easily actionable reference.

## History

The "history" section is optional, and documents events and context around a
significant edit to an AIP. For example, explanation of rewrite would be
included in this section

While the changelog is a dotted list of one-line summaries of changes to an AIP,
the history section should elaborate on significant events in a descriptive
format.

The section **must not** be used to exhaustively enumerate all changes. This
is what the changelog provides.

## Further reading

A bulleted list of (usually) other AIPs, in the following format:

- [AIP-1](./0001.md): AIP purpose and guidelines

## Changelog

A bulleted list of changes in reverse chronological order, using the following
format:

- **2020-02-18**: Specified ordering.
- **2019-07-01**: Added a subsection clarifying XYZ.
```

AIPs **should** attempt to follow this overall format if possible, but AIPs
**may** deviate from it if necessary (in particular, if the AIP would be more
difficult to understand, even for a reader already accustomed to reading AIPs in
the usual format).

**Note:** Except for the title, AIPs **must** only use the second heading level
(`##`) and above. AIPs **should** only use the second and third heading levels
(`##`, `###`).

### Requirement keywords

AIPs **should** use the following requirement level keywords: "MUST", "MUST
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY", which are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119][].

When using these terms in AIPs, they **must** be lower-case and **bold**. These
terms **should not** be used in other ways.

If "SHOULD" or "SHOULD NOT" are used, they **must** include valid examples of
where other concerns may override the guidance.

**Important:** If rationale is used, it exists to provide background and a more
complete understanding, but **must not** contain guidance (and RFC-2119 terms
**must not** be used).

### Code examples

API design examples in AIPs **should** use [protocol buffers][]. Examples
**should** cover only enough syntax to explain the concept. When using RPCs in
examples, a `google.api.http` annotation **should** be included.

### Referencing AIPs

When AIPs reference other AIPs, the prosaic text **must** use the format
`AIP-XXXX` without zero-padding (e.g., `AIP-8`, not `AIP-0008`), and **must**
link to the relevant AIP. AIP links **may** point to a particular section of the
AIP if appropriate.

**Important:** AIP links **must** use the relative path to the file in the
repository (such as `./0008.md` for core AIPs, or `../0008.md` for AIPs in a
subdirectory); this ensures that the link works both on the AIP site, when
viewing the Markdown file on GitHub, using the local development server, or a
branch.

## Rationale

### Designing for a broad set of clients

API guidance, similar to any software, is most beneficial when there is a clear
purpose and target beneficiary.

The beneficiaries of improved API design are users. These users interact with
APIs via a variety of clients, depending on their use case as enumerated above.

API guidance must in turn consider the impact broadly across these clients.

[aip-1]: ./0001.md
[Infrastructure as Code]: ./0009.md#iac
[IaC]: ./0009.md#iac
[protocol buffers]: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/
[rfc 2119]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt

## Changelog

- **2023-05-20**: Increase API guidance scope to include broad set of clients.
- **2023-03-30**: Removed appendix, added rationale and history to the template.
- **2020-02-18**: Specified reverse chronological ordering for changelog items.
- **2019-08-23**: Added guidance for internal AIP links.