---
id: 111
state: draft
created: 2023-06-17
placement:
  category: api-concepts
  order: 50
---

# Planes

Resources and methods on an API can be divided into the *plane* that they reside
or perform operations upon. For the context of APIs, the following planes are
defined:

- Management plane: a uniform, resource-oriented API that primarily
  configures and allows retrieval of resources.
- Data plane: a heterogenous API (ideally resource-oriented) that reads and
  write user data. Often connects to entities provisioned by the management
  plane, such as virtual machines.

The term "plane" was originally used in networking architecture. Although system
and network architecure often defines additional planes (e.g. control plane or
power planes), as the AIPs are focused on the interface, they are not defined in
this AIP.

## Guidance

### Management Plane

Management resources and methods exist primarily to provision, configure, and
audit the resources that the data plane interfaces with.

As an example, the following are considered management resources for a cloud
provider:

- virtual machines
- virtual private networks
- virtual disks
- a blob store instance
- a project or account

### Data Plane

Methods on the data plane operate on user data in a variety of data formats, and
generally interface with a resource provisioned via a management plane API.
Examples of data plane methods include:

- writing and reading rows in a table
- pushing to or pulling from a message queue
- uploading blobs to or downloading blobs from a blob store instance

Data plane APIs **may** be heterogenous across a larger API surface, due to
requirements including high throughput, low latency, or the need to adhere to an
existing interface specification (e.g. ANSI SQL).

- For convenience, resources and methods that operate on the data plane **may**
expose themselves via resource-oriented management APIs. If so, those resources
and methods **must** adhere to the requirements of the management plane as
specified in the other AIPs.

### Major distinctions between management and data plane

- [IaC][] tools operate on the management plane exclusively.
- Data planes are often on the critical path of user-facing functionality, and
  therefore:
  - Have higher availabilty requirements than management planes.
  - Are more peformance-sensitive than management planes.
  - Require higher-throughput than management planes.

### Planes are contextual

A method can be considered a management or data operation depending on the
context.

For example, consider a cloud provider which exposes a Kubernetes cluster
resource, which in turn exposes it's own API with resources. In the context of
the cloud, the operations to provision and configure the cluster are *management
plane*, while operations against the Kubernetes cluster are *data plane*.

In the context of the Kubernetes cluster, the operations against the API server
are *management plane*.

The following are common contexts:

- When a first-party service is hosting third-party services, the first-party
  provisioning operations are *management plane* while the operations against
  the third-party service are *data-plane*.

When the plane is discussed in Google AIPs, the context is Google APIs.

[IaC]: ./0009.md#iac

## Changelog

- **2023-06-10**: Introduction of this AIP.