---
id: 123
state: approved
created: 2019-05-12
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 30
---

# Resource types

Most APIs expose _resources_ (their primary nouns) which users are able to
create, retrieve, and manipulate. APIs are allowed to name their resource types
reasonably freely (within the requirements of this AIP), and are only required
to ensure uniqueness within that API. This means that it is possible (and often
desirable) for different APIs to use the same type name. For example, a Memcache
and Redis API would both want to use `Instance` as a type name.

When mapping the relationships between APIs and their resources, however, it
becomes important to have a single, globally-unique type name. Additionally,
tools such as Kubernetes or GraphQL interact with APIs from multiple providers.

## Terminology

In the guidance below, we use the following terms:

- **Service Name:** This is the name defined in the [service configuration][].
  This usually (but not necessarily) matches the hostname that users use to
  call the service. Example: `pubsub.googleapis.com`. This is equivalent to an
  [API Group][] in Kubernetes.
- **Type:** This is the name used for the type within the API. This *should*
  match the name of the protobuf message. This is equivalent to an [Object][] in
  Kubernetes.

## Guidance

APIs **must** define a resource type for each resource in the API, according to
the following pattern: `{Service Name}/{Type}`. The type name **must**:

- Start with an uppercase letter.
- Only contain alphanumeric characters.
- Be of the singular form of the noun.
- Use PascalCase (UpperCamelCase).

### Examples

Examples of resource types include:

- `pubsub.googleapis.com/Topic`
- `pubsub.googleapis.com/Subscription`
- `spanner.googleapis.com/Database`
- `spanner.googleapis.com/Instance`
- `networking.istio.io/Instance`

### Annotating resource types

APIs **should** annotate the resource types for each resource in the API using
the [`google.api.resource`][resource] annotation:

```proto
// A representation of a Pub/Sub topic.
message Topic {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "pubsub.googleapis.com/Topic"
    pattern: "projects/{project}/topics/{topic}"
    singular: "topic"
    plural: "topics"
  };

  // Name and other fields...
}
```

- Patterns **must** correspond to the [resource name][aip-122].
- Pattern variables (the segments within braces) **must** use `snake_case`, and
  **must not** use an `_id` suffix.
- Pattern variables **must** conform to the format `[a-z][_a-z0-9]*[a-z0-9]`.
- Pattern variables **must** be unique within any given pattern. (e.g.
  `projects/{abc}/topics/{abc}` is invalid; this is usually a natural
  corollary of collection identifiers being unique within a pattern.)
- Resources with [multiple patterns][multi-pattern-resources] **must**
  preserve ordering: new patterns **must** be added at the end of the list, and
  existing patterns **must not** be removed or re-ordered, as this breaks client
  library backward compatibility.
- Singular **must** be the lower camel case of the type.
  - Pattern variables **must** be the singular form of the resource type e.g.
    a pattern variable representing a `Topic` resource ID is named `{topic}`.
- Plural **must** be the lower camel case plural of the singular.
  - Pattern collection identifier segments **must** match the plural of the
    resources, except in the case of [nested collections][].

#### Pattern uniqueness

When multiple patterns are defined within a resource, these patterns **must**
be mutually unique, where uniqueness is defined as being by-character identical
once all resource ID path segments have been removed, leaving all `/`
separators.

Therefore the following two patterns **must not** be defined within the same
resource:

- `user/{user}`
- `user/{user_part_1}~{user_part_2}`

## Rationale

### Singular and Plural

Well-defined singular and plurals of a resource enable clients to determine the
proper name to use in code and documentation.

lowerCamelCase can be translated into other common forms of a resource name
such as UpperCamelCase and snake_case.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[multi-pattern-resources]: https://google.aip.dev/client-libraries/4231#multi-pattern-resources
[API Group]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-groups
[nested collections]: ./0122.md#collection-identifiers
[Object]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#types-kinds
[resource]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/api/resource.proto
[service configuration]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/api/service.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Changelog

- **2024-08-07**: Added multi-pattern ordering compatibility requirements.
- **2023-09-19**: Prohibited duplicate pattern variables.
- **2023-05-06**: Added requirement of singular and plural.
- **2023-01-28**: Clarified guidance for the resource type name.
- **2022-10-28**: Added pattern variable format guidance.
- **2020-05-14**: Added pattern uniqueness.
- **2019-12-05**: Added guidance on patterns.
- **2019-07-17**: Fleshed out the annotation example somewhat.
