---
id: 124
state: approved
created: 2020-03-20
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 40
---

# Resource association

APIs sometimes have resource hierarchies that can not be cleanly expressed in
the usual tree structure. For example, a resource may have a many-to-one
relationship with two other resource types instead of just one. Alternatively,
a resource may have a many-to-many relationship with another resource type.

## Guidance

A resource **must** have at most one canonical parent, and `List` requests
**must not** require two distinct "parents" to work.

### Multiple many-to-one associations

If a resource has a many-to-one relationship with multiple resource types, it
**must** choose at most one of them to be the canonical parent. The resource
**may** be associated with other resources through other fields on the
resource.

```proto
message Book {
  // The resource name pattern for Book indicates that Publisher is the
  // canonical parent.
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}"
  };

  // The resource name for the book.
  string name = 1;

  // The resource name for the book's author.
  string author = 2 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Author"
  }];
}
```

When listing resources with multiple associations in this way, the RPC **must**
treat the `string parent` field as required as discussed in [AIP-132][], and
**must not** add additional required arguments. The RPC **should** include a
`string filter` field that allows users to filter by other resource
associations as discussed in [AIP-160][].

### Many-to-many associations

Many-to-many associations are less common in APIs than they are in relational
databases, in part because they are more difficult to model and present over
network interfaces.

An API **may** contain many-to-many relationships, and **should** use a
repeated field containing a list of resource names, following the principles
described for repeated fields in [AIP-144][].

```proto
message Book {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}"
  };

  string name = 1;

  // The resource names for the book's authors.
  repeated string authors = 2 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Author"
  }];
}
```

**Note:** See [AIP-144][] for more information on repeated fields, including
how to handle common issues such as atomic changes.

If the use of a repeated field is too restrictive, or if more metadata is
required along with the association, an API **may** model a many-to-many
relationship using a sub-resource with two one-to-many associations.

```proto
message BookAuthor {
  // The resource pattern for BookAuthor indicates that Book is the
  // canonical parent.
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/BookAuthor"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}/authors/{book_author}"
  }

  // The resource name for the book-author association.
  string name = 1;

  // The resource name for the author.
  string author = 2 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Author"
  }];

  // Other fields...
}
```

**Note:** Using subresources to model an association between resources is only
recommended if additional metadata is required in the relationship, or if the
restrictions around the use of a repeated field preclude the use of that
approach.

[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-144]: ./0144.md
[aip-160]: ./0160.md
