---
id: 127
state: approved
created: 2019-08-22
placement:
  category: protobuf
  order: 10
---

# HTTP and gRPC Transcoding

APIs that follow [resource-oriented design][aip-121] are defined using
[RPCs][rpc], but the resource-oriented design framework allows them to also be
presented as APIs that largely follow REST/JSON conventions. This is important
in order to help developers use their existing knowledge: over 80% of the
public APIs available follow most REST conventions, and developers are
accustomed to that pattern.

## Guidance

APIs **must** provide HTTP definitions for each RPC that they define, except
for bi-directional streaming RPCs, which can not be natively supported using
HTTP/1.1. When providing a bi-directional streaming method, an API **should**
also offer an alternative method that does not rely on bi-directional
streaming.

### HTTP method and path

When using protocol buffers, each RPC **must** define the HTTP method and path
using the `google.api.http` annotation:

```proto
rpc CreateBook(CreateBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books"
    body: "book"
  };
}

message CreateBookRequest {
  // The publisher who will publish this book.
  // When using HTTP/JSON, this field is automatically populated based
  // on the URI, because of the `{parent=publishers/*}` syntax.
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The book to create.
  // When using HTTP/JSON, this field is populated based on the HTTP body,
  // because of the `body: "book"` syntax.
  Book book = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // The user-specified ID for the book.
  // When using HTTP/JSON, this field is populated based on a query string
  // argument, such as `?bookId=foo`. This is the fallback for fields that
  // are not included in either the URI or the body.
  // Note that clients use camelCase format to communicate the field names
  // to the service.
  string book_id = 3;
}
```

- The first key (`post` in this example) corresponds to the HTTP method. RPCs
  **may** use `get`, `post`, `patch`, or `delete`.
  - RPCs **must** use the prescribed HTTP verb for each standard method, as
    discussed in [AIP-131][], [AIP-132][], [AIP-133][], [AIP-134][], and
    [AIP-135][]
  - RPCs **should** use the prescribed HTTP verb for custom methods, as
    discussed in [AIP-136][].
  - RPCs **should not** use `put` or `custom`.
- The corresponding value represents the URI.
  - URIs **must** use the `{foo=bar/*}` syntax to represent a variable that
    should be populated in the request proto. When extracting a [resource
    name][aip-122], the variable **must** include the entire resource name, not
    just the ID component.
  - URIs **may** use nested fields for their variable names. (Additionally,
    AIP-134 mandates this for `Update` requests.)
  - URIs **must** use the `*` character to represent ID components, which
    matches all URI-safe characters except for `/`. URIs **may** use `**` as
    the final segment of a URI if matching `/` is required.
- The `body` key defines which single top-level field in the request will be
  sent as the HTTP body. If the body is `*`, then this indicates that the
  request object itself is the HTTP body. The request body is encoded as JSON
  as defined by protocol buffers' canonical [JSON encoding][].
  - RPCs **must not** define a `body` at all for RPCs that use the `GET` or
    `DELETE` HTTP verbs.
  - RPCs **must** use the prescribed `body` for Create ([AIP-133][]) and Update
    ([AIP-134][]) requests.
  - RPCs **should** use the prescribed `body` for custom methods ([AIP-136][]).
  - The `body` **must not** contain a nested field (or use the `.` character),
  - The `body` **must not** be the same as a URI parameter.
  - The `body` **must not** be a `repeated` field.
  - Fields **should not** use the `json_name` annotation to alter the field
    name in JSON, unless doing so for backwards-compatibility reasons.

**Note:** Bi-directional streaming RPCs should not include a `google.api.http`
annotation at all. If feasible, the service **should** provide non-streaming
equivalent RPCs.

### Multiple URI bindings

Occasionally, an RPC needs to correspond to more than one URI:

```proto
rpc CreateBook(CreateBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books"
    body: "book"
    additional_bindings: {
      post: "/v1/{parent=authors/*}/books"
      body: "book"
    }
    additional_bindings: {
      post: "/v1/books"
      body: "book"
    }
  };
}
```

- RPCs **may** define any number of additional bindings. The structure is
  identical to the `google.api.http` annotation (in fact, it is a recursive
  reference).
- RPCs **must not** define an additional binding within an additional binding.
- The `body` clause **must** be identical in the top-level annotation and each
  additional binding.

## Changelog

- **2022-08-18**: Added the comment that query string parameter names are
  in camelCase.
- **2021-01-06**: Added clarification around `body` and nested fields.
- **2019-09-23**: Added a statement about request body encoding, and guidance
  discouraging `json_name`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-121]: ./0121.md
[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-133]: ./0133.md
[aip-134]: ./0134.md
[aip-135]: ./0135.md
[aip-136]: ./0136.md
[json encoding]: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3#json
[rpc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
