---
id: 128
state: approved
created: 2020-10-06
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 65
---

# Declarative-friendly interfaces

Many services need to interact with common DevOps tools, particularly those
that create and manage network-addressible resources (such as virtual machines,
load balancers, database instances, and so on). These tools revolve around the
principle of "configuration as code": the user specifies the complete intended
landscape, and tooling is responsible for making whatever changes are necessary
to achieve the user's specification.

These tools are **declarative**: rather than specifying specific _actions_ to
take, they specify the desired _outcome_, with the actions being derived based
on the differences between the current landscape and the intended one.

Furthermore, there are numerous popular DevOps tools, with more being
introduced each year. Integrating hundreds of resource types with multiple
tools requires uniformity, so that integration can be automated.

## Guidance

Services **should** clearly delineate between "control plane" operations and
"data plane" operations, ideally through the use of distinct services with
their own interface definition documents.

- Control plane operations are responsible for managing the _lifecycle_ of
  resources.
- Data plane operations are responsible for managing the _content_ of
  resources.

The same resource **may** have both control plane operations and data plane
operations associated with it. For example, a database API would have
operations to create or delete database tables (control plane) as well as
operations to write and read rows to that table (data plane).

### Resources

Resources that are declarative-friendly **must** use only strongly-consistent
standard methods for managing resource lifecycle, which allows tools to support
these resources generically, as well as conforming to other
declarative-friendly guidance (see [further reading](#further-reading)).

Declarative-friendly resources **should** designate that they follow the
declarative-friendly style:

```proto
message Book {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}"
    style: DECLARATIVE_FRIENDLY
  };

  string name = 1;
  // Other fields...
}
```

### Annotations

Declarative-friendly resources **must** include a
`map<string, string> annotations` field to allow clients to store small amounts
of arbitrary data.

The `annotations` field **must** use the [Kubernetes limits][] to maintain wire
compatibility, and **should** require dot-namespaced annotation keys to prevent
tools from trampling over one another.

**Note:** Annotations are distinct from various forms of labels. Labels can be
used by server-side policies, such as IAM conditions. Annotations exist to
allow client tools to store their own state information without requiring a
database.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
[kubernetes limits]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/#syntax-and-character-set

### Reconciliation

If a resource takes time (more than a few seconds) for updates to be realized,
the resource **should** include a `bool reconciling` field to disclose that
changes are in flight. This field **must** be output only.

A resource **must** set the `reconciling` field to `true` if the current state
of the resource does not match the user's intended state, and the system is
working to reconcile them. This is regardless of whether the root cause of
going into reconciliation was user or system action.

**Note:** Services responding to a `GET` request **must** return the resource's
current state (not the intended state).

## Further reading

A significant amount of guidance is more strict for declarative-friendly
interfaces, due to the focus on automation on top of these resources. This list
is a comprehensive reference to declarative-friendly guidance in other AIPs:

- Resources **must** use user-settable resource IDs: see AIP-133.
- Resources **must** permit "create or update": see AIP-134.
- Resources **should** permit "delete if existing": see AIP-135.
- Resources **should not** employ custom methods: see AIP-136.
- Resources **must** use the `Update` method for repeated fields: see AIP-144.
- Resources **must** include certain standard fields: see AIP-148.
- Resources **must** have an `etag` field: see AIP-154.
- Resources **must** provide change validation: see AIP-163.
- Resources **should** support soft delete: see AIP-164.
