---
id: 129
state: draft
created: 2023-06-21
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 65
---

# Server-Modified Values and Defaults

Server-modified and default values often result in a poor user experience for
[state-driven clients](state-driven-clients). These clients are often unable to
tell when their desired state matches the current state for these fields, as the
rules by which a server may modify and return values are complex, not public,
and not repeatable. This AIP aims to clarify what behaviors can be expected from
services and describing how they can be repeated on the client-side.

## Guidance

### Single Owner Fields

Fields should have a single owner, whether that is the client or the server.
Server owned fields should be indicated with the `OUTPUT_ONLY` field_behavior.
All other types of fields should be considered to be owned by the client. The
server should respect the value (or lack thereof) for all client owned fields
and not modify them. Failure to respect client set values can lead to
[Declarative clients][] entering an infinite loop to correct the change.

### Effective Values

There are instances where a service will allocate, generate, or calculate a
value if the client chooses not to specify one. For example: a client may
create a virtual machine without specifying a static IP address for the virtual
machine to be available on. Such a scenario is opting into dynamic IP address
allocation.

Some examples of these types of fields are ones that are:

* generated (UUID)
* allocated (dynamic IP address)
* assigned (most recent software package version)

An attribute with an effective value ***must*** be expressed as two fields in
the API:
* a mutable field that can be optionally set by the user and **must not** be
modified by the service
* an `OUTPUT_ONLY` field that records the effective value decided on by the
service

Example:
```proto
message VirtualMachine {
  …
  string ip_address = 4;
  string effective_ip_address = 5 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY
  ];
}
```

#### Naming

Effective values **must** be named by prefixing `effective_` to the mutable
field's name.

### User-Specified Fields

For user-specified fields, the value in response from the service **must** be
the same as provided by the create or update request. For string fields this
means returning the value unchanged, with two exceptions: 

* When a string field has a data type annotation, a normalized string that
represents the given value may be returned.
* When a string field has a default value indicated by the `default` keyword,
that default value may be returned when the given value is empty or missing.

### Normalizations

Only a set of allowed normalizations may be applied. Values that are not annoted
with the `google.api.value_type` annotation **must not** be normalized in any
way.

#### Allowed Normalizations

This list of allowed normalizations is defined as follows:

* uuid
* ipv4
* ipv6
* email

Normalizations on fields **must** be described using the `google.api.value_type`
annotation.

#### Field Value Handling

For all values that do not have an allowed normalization applied:

* service **must** define and validate a single representation of a field. 
* service **must** return an error when a client submitted value doesn't match
defined format.

## Rationale

### Rationale for Naming

Consistent naming is important for identifying standard behavior across APIs
and fields. Programmatic association between user-specified and effective values
depends on consistent naming.

### Rationale for Normalizations

Normalizations are important to allow services to store and return values in a
standard way while communicating to clients what changes are semantically
identical. Normalizing a value on the service side allows the service to accept
a wider range of semantically identical inputs without needing to maintain every
value as a raw string. Surfacing the normalization that is being applied to
clients allows for client side comparison of sent and retrieved values to check
for differences.

For example, in a resource that accepts an email address on a particular field
a client may specify a given email address in a variety of ways. For the email
`ada@example.com` a client may choose to specify `ADA@example.com`,
`aDa@example.com`, or `AdA@example.com`. These are semantically identical and
*should* all be accepted by the service. The service then may choose to
normalize the email address for storage and retrieval through downcasing or
canonicalization. Importantly, the information surfaced to clients on the
normalization of a field will not describe the normalization algorithm itself,
but instead the comparison method used to accurately compute if two values
should be considered equal.

### Rationale for Field Value Handling

For fields not using an allowed normalization,
[Declarative clients][] will not be able to identify which changes are
semantically meaningful. When a [Declarative client][Declarative clients]
sends a particular value it will ensure that the value is being returned by the
service to validate it was set correctly.

[Declarative clients]: ./0009#declarative-clients

## Changelog

- 

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-180]: ./0180.md
[state-driven-clients]: ./009.md#state-driven-clients
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->