---
id: 131
state: approved
created: 2019-01-22
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 10
---

# GET for individual resources

In REST APIs, it is customary to make a `GET` request to a resource's URI (for
example, `/v1/publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}`) in order to retrieve that
resource.

Our APIs honor this pattern by allowing `GET` requests to be sent to the
resource URI, which returns the resource itself.

## Guidance

APIs **should** generally provide a `GET` method for resources unless it is not
valuable for users to do so. The purpose of this method is to return data for a
single resource.

### Requests

Single-resource `GET` methods **must** be made be sending a `GET` request to
the resource's path:

```http
GET /v1/publishers/{publisher}/books/{book} HTTP/2
Host: library.googleapis.com
Accept: application/json
```

- The HTTP verb **must** be `GET`.
  - The request **must** be safe and **must not** have side effects.
- There **must not** be a request body.
  - If a `GET` request contains a body, the body **must** be ignored, and
    **must not** cause an error.

### Responses

Single-resource `GET` methods **must** return the resource itself, without any
additional wrapping:

```json
{
  "name": "publishers/lacroix/books/les-mis",
  "title": "Les Misérables",
  "authors": ["Victor Hugo"],
  "rating": 9.6
}
```

### Errors

If the user does not have permission to access the resource, regardless of
whether or not it exists, the service **must** reply with an HTTP 403 error.
Permission **must** be checked prior to checking if the resource exists.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested resource does not
exist, the service **must** reply with an HTTP 404 error.

## Interface Definitions

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
=== "Protocol buffers"

  Get methods are specified using the following pattern:

  ```proto
  // Get a single book.
  rpc GetBook(GetBookRequest) returns (Book) {
    option (google.api.http) = {
      get: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}"
    };
    option (google.api.method_signature) = "name";
  }
  ```

  - The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Get`. The remainder of the RPC
    name **should** be the singular form of the resource's message name.
  - The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `-Request` suffix.
  - The response message **must** be the resource itself. (There is no
    `GetBookResponse`.)
    - The response **should** usually include the fully-populated resource unless
      there is a reason to return a partial response (see AIP-157).
  - The HTTP verb **must** be `GET`.
  - The URI **should** contain a single variable field corresponding to the
    resource name.
    - This field **should** be called `name`.
    - The URI **should** have a variable corresponding to this field.
    - The `name` field **should** be the only variable in the URI path. All
      remaining parameters **should** map to URI query parameters.
  - There **must not** be a `body` key in the `google.api.http` annotation.
  - There **should** be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation,
    with a value of `"name"`.

  Get methods also implement a common request message pattern:

  ```proto
  message GetBookRequest {
    // The name of the book to retrieve.
    // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
    string name = 1 [
      (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
      (google.api.resource_reference) = {
        type: "library-example.googleapis.com/Book"
      }];
  }
  ```

  - A resource name field **must** be included. It **should** be called `name`.
    - The field **should** be annotated as required.
    - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] that it
      references.
  - The comment for the `name` field **should** document the resource pattern.
  - The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
    **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in
    another AIP.

  **Note:** The `name` field in the request object corresponds to the `name`
  variable in the `google.api.http` annotation on the RPC. This causes the `name`
  field in the request to be populated based on the value in the URL when the
  REST/JSON interface is used.

=== "OpenAPI 3.0"

  Single-resource `GET` methods **must** be specified with consistent OpenAPI
  metadata:

  ```yaml
  paths:
    /publishers/{publisherId}/books/{id}:
      get:
        operationId: getBook
        description: Get a single book.
        responses:
          200:
            description: OK
            content:
              application/json:
                schema:
                  $ref: '#/components/schemas/Book'
  ```

  - The `operationId` **must** begin with the word `get`. The remainder of the
    `operationId` **should** be the singular form of the resource type's name.
  - The response content **must** be the resource itself. For example:
    `#/components/schemas/Book`
    - The response **should** usually include the fully-populated resource
      unless there is a reason to return a partial response (see AIP-157).
  - The URI **should** contain a variable for each individual ID in the resource
    hierarchy.
    - The variable for the resource ID **must** be named `id`. Variables
      representing the ID of parent resources **must** end with `Id`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Changelog

- **2020-06-08**: Added guidance on returning the full resource.
- **2019-10-18**: Added guidance on annotations.
- **2019-08-12**: Added guidance for error cases.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
- **2019-05-29**: Added an explicit prohibition on arbitrary fields in standard
  methods.
