---
id: 132
state: approved
created: 2019-01-21
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 20
---

# Standard methods: List

In many APIs, it is customary to make a `GET` request to a collection's URI
(for example, `/v1/publishers/1/books`) in order to retrieve a list of
resources, each of which lives within that collection.

Resource-oriented design ([AIP-121][]) honors this pattern through the `List`
method. These RPCs accept the parent collection (and potentially some other
parameters), and return a list of responses matching that input.

## Guidance

APIs **should** generally provide a `List` method for resources unless it is
not valuable for users to do so. The purpose of the `List` method is to return
data from a single, finite collection.

List methods are specified using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc ListBooks(ListBooksRequest) returns (ListBooksResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    get: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books"
  };
  option (google.api.method_signature) = "parent";
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `List`. The remainder of the RPC
  name **should** be the plural form of the resource being listed.
- The request and response messages **must** match the RPC name, with
  `Request` and `Response` suffixes.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `GET`.
- The collection whose resources are being listed **should** map to the URI
  path.
  - The collection's parent resource **should** be called `parent`, and
    **should** be the only variable in the URI path. All remaining parameters
    **should** map to URI query parameters.
  - The collection identifier (`books` in the above example) **must** be a
    literal string.
- The `body` key in the `google.api.http` annotation **must** be omitted.
- If the resource being listed is not a top-level resource, there **should**
  be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation, with a value of
  `"parent"`. If the resource being listed is a top-level resource, there
  **should** be either no `google.api.method_signature` annotation, or exactly
  one `google.api.method_signature` annotation, with a value of `""`.

### Request message

List methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message ListBooksRequest {
  // The parent, which owns this collection of books.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The maximum number of books to return. The service may return fewer than
  // this value.
  // If unspecified, at most 50 books will be returned.
  // The maximum value is 1000; values above 1000 will be coerced to 1000.
  int32 page_size = 2;

  // A page token, received from a previous `ListBooks` call.
  // Provide this to retrieve the subsequent page.
  //
  // When paginating, all other parameters provided to `ListBooks` must match
  // the call that provided the page token.
  string page_token = 3;
}
```

- A `parent` field **must** be included unless the resource being listed is a
  top-level resource. It **should** be called `parent`.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] of the resource
    being listed.
- The `page_size` and `page_token` fields, which support pagination, **must**
  be specified on all list request messages. For more information, see
  [AIP-158][].
  - The comment above the `page_size` field **should** document the maximum
    allowed value, as well as the default value if the field is omitted (or set
    to `0`). If preferred, the API **may** state that the server will use a
    sensible default. This default **may** change over time.
  - If a user provides a value greater than the maximum allowed value, the API
    **should** coerce the value to the maximum allowed.
  - If a user provides a negative or other invalid value, the API **must** send
    an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error.
- The `page_token` field **must** be included on all list request messages.
- The request message **may** include fields for common design patterns
  relevant to list methods, such as `string filter` and `string order_by`.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.

**Note:** List methods **should** return the same results for any user that has
permission to make a successful List request on the collection. Search methods
are more relaxed on this.

### Response message

List methods implement a common response message pattern:

```proto
message ListBooksResponse {
  // The books from the specified publisher.
  repeated Book books = 1;

  // A token, which can be sent as `page_token` to retrieve the next page.
  // If this field is omitted, there are no subsequent pages.
  string next_page_token = 2;
}
```

- The response message **must** include one repeated field corresponding to the
  resources being returned, and **should not** include any other repeated
  fields unless described in another AIP (for example, AIP-217).
  - The response **should** usually include fully-populated resources unless
    there is a reason to return a partial response (see AIP-157).
- The `next_page_token` field, which supports pagination, **must** be included
  on all list response messages. It **must** be set if there are subsequent
  pages, and **must not** be set if the response represents the final page. For
  more information, see AIP-158.
- The message **may** include a `int32 total_size` (or `int64 total_size`)
  field with the number of items in the collection.
  - The value **may** be an estimate (the field **should** clearly document
    this if so).
  - If filtering is used, the `total_size` field **should** reflect the size of
    the collection _after_ the filter is applied.

### Ordering

`List` methods **may** allow clients to specify sorting order; if they do, the
request message **should** contain a `string order_by` field.

- Values **should** be a comma separated list of fields. For example:
  `"foo,bar"`.
- The default sorting order is ascending. To specify descending order for a
  field, users append a `" desc"` suffix; for example: `"foo desc, bar"`.
- Redundant space characters in the syntax are insignificant.
  `"foo, bar desc"`, `" foo , bar desc "`, and `"foo,bar desc"` are all
  equivalent.
- Subfields are specified with a `.` character, such as `foo.bar` or
  `address.street`.

<!-- TODO(#220): Add a reference to AIP-161 once it is written. -->

**Note:** Only include ordering if there is an established need to do so. It is
always possible to add ordering later, but removing it is a breaking change.

### Filtering

List methods **may** allow clients to specify filters; if they do, the request
message **should** contain a `string filter` field. Filtering is described in
more detail in AIP-160.

**Note:** Only include filtering if there is an established need to do so. It
is always possible to add filtering later, but removing it is a breaking
change.

### Soft-deleted resources

Some APIs need to "[soft delete][]" resources, marking them as deleted or
pending deletion (and optionally purging them later).

APIs that do this **should not** include deleted resources by default in list
requests. APIs with soft deletion of a resource **should** include a
`bool show_deleted` field in the list request that, if set, will cause
soft-deleted resources to be included.

[aip-121]: ./0121.md
[aip-123]: ./0123.md
[aip-157]: ./0157.md
[aip-158]: ./0158.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[soft delete]: ./0135.md#soft-delete

### Errors

If the user does not have permission to access the parent resource, regardless
of whether or not it exists, the service **must** error with
`PERMISSION_DENIED` (HTTP 403). Permission **must** be checked prior to
checking if the parent resource exists.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested parent resource does
not exist, the service **must** error with `NOT_FOUND` (HTTP 404).

## Further reading

- For details on pagination, see [AIP-158](./0158.md).
- For listing across multiple parent collections, see [AIP-159](./0159.md).

## Changelog

- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2020-09-02**: Add link to the filtering AIP.
- **2020-08-14**: Added error guidance for permission denied cases.
- **2020-06-08**: Added guidance on returning the full resource.
- **2020-05-19**: Removed requirement to document ordering behavior.
- **2020-04-15**: Added guidance on List permissions.
- **2019-10-18**: Added guidance on annotations.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
- **2019-07-30**: Added guidance about documenting the ordering behavior.
- **2019-05-29**: Added an explicit prohibition on arbitrary fields in standard
  methods.
