---
id: 133
state: approved
created: 2019-01-23
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 30
---

# Standard methods: Create

In REST APIs, it is customary to make a `POST` request to a collection's URI
(for example, `/v1/publishers/{publisher}/books`) in order to create a new
resource within that collection.

Resource-oriented design ([AIP-121][]) honors this pattern through the `Create`
method. These RPCs accept the parent collection and the resource to create (and
potentially some other parameters), and return the created resource.

## Guidance

APIs **should** generally provide a create method for resources unless it is
not valuable for users to do so. The purpose of the create method is to create
a new resource in an already-existing collection.

Create methods are specified using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc CreateBook(CreateBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books"
    body: "book"
  };
  option (google.api.method_signature) = "parent,book";
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Create`. The remainder of the
  RPC name **should** be the singular form of the resource being created.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The response message **must** be the resource itself. There is no
  `CreateBookResponse`.
  - The response **should** include the fully-populated resource, and **must**
    include any fields that were provided unless they are input only (see
    [AIP-203][]).
  - If the create RPC is [long-running](#long-running-create), the response
    message **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` which resolves to the
    resource itself.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`.
- The collection where the resource is being added **should** map to the URI
  path.
  - The collection's parent resource **should** be called `parent`, and
    **should** be the only variable in the URI path.
  - The collection identifier (`books` in the above example) **must** be
    a literal string.
- There **must** be a `body` key in the `google.api.http` annotation, and it
  **must** map to the resource field in the request message.
  - All remaining fields **should** map to URI query parameters.
- There **should** be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation,
  with a value of `"parent,{resource}"` if the resource being created is not a
  top-level resource, or with a value of `"{resource}"` if the resource being
  created is a top-level resource (unless the method supports [user-specified
  IDs](#user-specified-ids)).

### Request message

Create methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message CreateBookRequest {
  // The parent resource where this book will be created.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The book to create.
  Book book = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];
}
```

- A `parent` field **must** be included unless the resource being created is a
  top-level resource. It **should** be called `parent`.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] of the resource
    being created.
- The resource field **must** be included and **must** map to the POST body.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.

### Long-running create

Some resources take longer to create a resource than is reasonable for a
regular API request. In this situation, the API **should** use a long-running
operation (AIP-151) instead:

```proto
rpc CreateBook(CreateBookRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "Book"
    metadata_type: "OperationMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The response type **must** be set to the resource (what the return type would
  be if the RPC was not long-running).
- Both the `response_type` and `metadata_type` fields **must** be specified.

**Important:** Declarative-friendly resources (AIP-128) **should** use
long-running operations. The service **may** return an LRO that is already set
to done if the request is effectively immediate.

### User-specified IDs

Sometimes, an API needs to allow a client to specify the ID component of a
resource (the last segment of the resource name) on creation. This is common if
users are allowed to choose that portion of their resource names.

For example:

```
// Using user-specified IDs.
publishers/lacroix/books/les-miserables

// Using system-generated IDs.
publishers/012345678-abcd-cdef/books/12341234-5678-abcd
```

Create RPCs **may** support this behavior by providing a `string {resource}_id`
field on the request message:

```proto
message CreateBookRequest {
  // The parent resource where this book will be created.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The book to create.
  Book book = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // The ID to use for the book, which will become the final component of
  // the book's resource name.
  //
  // This value should be 4-63 characters, and valid characters
  // are /[a-z][0-9]-/.
  string book_id = 3;
}
```

- The `{resource}_id` field **must** exist on the request message, not the
  resource itself.
  - The field **may** be required or optional. If it is required, it **should**
    include the corresponding annotation.
- The `name` field on the resource **must** be ignored.
- There **should** be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation on
  the RPC, with a value of `"parent,{resource},{resource}_id"` if the resource
  being created is not a top-level resource, or with a value of
  `"{resource},{resource}_id"` if the resource being created is a top-level
  resource.
- The documentation **should** explain what the acceptable format is, and the
  format **should** follow the guidance for resource name formatting in
  [AIP-122][].
- If a user tries to create a resource with an ID that would result in a
  duplicate resource name, the service **must** error with `ALREADY_EXISTS`.
  - However, if the user making the call does not have permission to see the
    duplicate resource, the service **must** error with `PERMISSION_DENIED`
    instead.

**Note:** For REST APIs, the user-specified ID field, `{resource}_id`,
is provided as a query parameters on the request URI.

**Important:** Declarative-friendly resources (AIP-128) **must** support
user-specified IDs.

## Further reading

- For ensuring idempotency in `Create` methods, see [AIP-155][].
- For naming resources involving Unicode, see [AIP-210][].

[aip-121]: ./0121.md
[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[aip-123]: ./0123.md
[aip-155]: ./0155.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[aip-210]: ./0210.md

## Changelog

- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2020-10-06**: Added declarative-friendly guidance.
- **2020-08-14**: Updated error guidance to use permission denied over
  forbidden.
- **2020-06-08**: Added guidance on returning the full resource.
- **2019-11-22**: Added clarification on what error to use if a duplicate name
  is sent.
- **2019-10-18**: Added guidance on annotations.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
- **2019-06-10**: Added guidance for long-running create.
- **2019-05-29**: Added an explicit prohibition on arbitrary fields in standard
  methods.
