---
id: 134
state: approved
created: 2019-01-24
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 40
---

# Standard methods: Update

In REST APIs, it is customary to make a `PATCH` or `PUT` request to a
resource's URI (for example, `/v1/publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}`) in
order to update that resource.

Resource-oriented design ([AIP-121][]) honors this pattern through the `Update`
method (which mirrors the REST `PATCH` behavior). These RPCs accept the URI
representing that resource and return the resource.

## Guidance

APIs **should** generally provide an update method for resources unless it is
not valuable for users to do so. The purpose of the update method is to make
changes to the resources without causing side effects.

Update methods are specified using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc UpdateBook(UpdateBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    patch: "/v1/{book.name=publishers/*/books/*}"
    body: "book"
  };
  option (google.api.method_signature) = "book,update_mask";
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Update`. The remainder of the
  RPC name **should** be the singular form of the resource's message name.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The response message **must** be the resource itself. (There is no
  `UpdateBookResponse`.)
  - The response **should** include the fully-populated resource, and **must**
    include any fields that were sent and included in the update mask unless
    they are input only (see AIP-203).
  - If the update RPC is [long-running](#long-running-update), the response
    message **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` which resolves to the
    resource itself.
- The method **should** support partial resource update, and the HTTP verb
  **should** be `PATCH`.
  - If the method will only ever support full resource replacement, then the
    HTTP verb **may** be `PUT`. However, this is strongly discouraged because
    it becomes a backwards-incompatible change to add fields to the resource.
- The resource's `name` field **should** map to the URI path.
  - The `{resource}.name` field **should** be the only variable in the URI
    path.
- There **must** be a `body` key in the `google.api.http` annotation, and it
  **must** map to the resource field in the request message.
  - All remaining fields **should** map to URI query parameters.
- There **should** be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation,
  with a value of `"{resource},update_mask"`.

**Note:** Unlike the other four standard methods, the URI path here references
a nested field (`book.name`) in the example. If the resource field has a word
separator, `snake_case` is used.

### Request message

Update methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message UpdateBookRequest {
  // The book to update.
  //
  // The book's `name` field is used to identify the book to update.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  Book book = 1 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // The list of fields to update.
  google.protobuf.FieldMask update_mask = 2;
}
```

- The request message **must** contain a field for the resource.
  - The field **must** map to the `PATCH` body.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - A `name` field **must** be included in the resource message. It **should**
    be called `name`.
- If partial resource update is supported, a field mask **must** be included.
  It **must** be of type `google.protobuf.FieldMask`, and it **should** be
  called `update_mask`.
  - The fields used in the field mask correspond to the resource being updated
    (not the request message).
  - The field **may** be required or optional. If it is required, it **must**
    include the corresponding annotation. If optional, the service **must**
    treat an omitted field mask as an implied field mask equivalent to all
    fields that are populated (have a non-empty value).
  - Update masks **must** support a special value `*`, meaning full replacement
    (the equivalent of `PUT`).
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.

### Side effects

In general, update methods are intended to update the data within the resource.
Update methods **should not** trigger other side effects. Instead, side effects
**should** be triggered by custom methods.

In particular, this entails that [state fields][] **must not** be directly
writable in update methods.

### PATCH and PUT

**TL;DR:** Google APIs generally use the `PATCH` HTTP verb only, and do not
support `PUT` requests.

We standardize on `PATCH` because Google updates stable APIs in place with
backwards-compatible improvements. It is often necessary to add a new field to
an existing resource, but this becomes a breaking change when using `PUT`.

To illustrate this, consider a `PUT` request to a `Book` resource:

    PUT /v1/publishers/123/books/456

    {"title": "Mary Poppins", "author": "P.L. Travers"}

Next consider that the resource is later augmented with a new field (here we
add `rating`):

```proto
message Book {
  string title = 1;
  string author = 2;

  // Subsequently added to v1 in place...
  int32 rating = 3;
}
```

If a rating is set on a book and the existing `PUT` request was executed, it
would wipe out the book's rating. In essence, a `PUT` request unintentionally
wiped out data because the previous version did not know about it.

### Long-running update

Some resources take longer to update a resource than is reasonable for a
regular API request. In this situation, the API **should** use a long-running
operation (AIP-151) instead:

```proto
rpc UpdateBook(UpdateBookRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    patch: "/v1/{book.name=publishers/*/books/*}"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "Book"
    metadata_type: "OperationMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The response type **must** be set to the resource (what the return type would
  be if the RPC was not long-running).
- Both the `response_type` and `metadata_type` fields **must** be specified.

**Note:** Declarative-friendly resources ([AIP-128][]) **should** use long-running
update.

### Create or update

If the service uses client-assigned resource names, `Update` methods **may**
expose a `bool allow_missing` field, which will cause the method to succeed in
the event that the user attempts to update a resource that is not present (and
will create the resource in the process):

```proto
message UpdateBookRequest {
  // The book to update.
  //
  // The book's `name` field is used to identify the book to be updated.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  Book book = 1 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // The list of fields to be updated.
  google.protobuf.FieldMask update_mask = 2;

  // If set to true, and the book is not found, a new book will be created.
  // In this situation, `update_mask` is ignored.
  bool allow_missing = 3;
}
```

More specifically, the `allow_missing` flag triggers the following behavior:

- If the method call is on a resource that does not exist, the resource is
  created. All fields are applied regardless of any provided field mask.
  - However, if any required fields are missing or fields have invalid values,
    an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error is returned.
- If the method call is on a resource that already exists, and all fields
  match, the existing resource is returned unchanged.
- If the method call is on a resource that already exists, only fields declared
  in the field mask are updated.

The user **must** have the update permissions to call `Update` even with
`allow_missing` set to `true`. For customers that want to prevent users from
creating resources using the update method, IAM conditions **should** be used.

**Note:** Declarative-friendly resources ([AIP-128][]) **must** expose the
`bool allow_missing` field.

### Etags

An API may sometimes need to allow users to send update requests which are
guaranteed to be made against the most current data (a common use case for this
is to detect and avoid race conditions). Resources which need to enable this do
so by including a `string etag` field, which contains an opaque,
server-computed value representing the content of the resource.

In this situation, the resource **should** contain a `string etag` field:

```proto
message Book {
  // The resource name of the book.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1;

  // The title of the book.
  // Example: "Mary Poppins"
  string title = 2;

  // The author of the book.
  // Example: "P.L. Travers"
  string author = 3;

  // The etag for this book.
  // If this is provided on update, it must match the server's etag.
  string etag = 4;
}
```

The `etag` field **may** be either [required][] or [optional][]. If it is set,
then the request **must** succeed if and only if the provided etag matches the
server-computed value, and **must** fail with an `ABORTED` error otherwise. The
`update_mask` field in the request does not affect the behavior of the `etag`
field, as it is not a field _being_ updated.

### Expensive fields

APIs sometimes encounter situations where some fields on a resource are
expensive or impossible to reliably return.

This can happen in a few situations:

- A resource may have some fields that are very expensive to compute, and that
  are generally not useful to the customer on update requests.
- A single resource sometimes represents an amalgamation of data from multiple
  underlying (and eventually consistent) data sources. In these situations, it
  is impossible to return authoritative information on the fields that were not
  changed.

In this situation, an API **may** return back only the fields that were
updated, and omit the rest, and **should** document this behavior if they do
so.

[aip-121]: ./0121.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[create]: ./0133.md
[state fields]: ./0216.md
[aip-128]: ./0128.md
[required]: ./0203.md#required
[optional]: ./0203.md#optional

### Errors

If the user does not have permission to access the resource, regardless of
whether or not it exists, the service **must** error with `PERMISSION_DENIED`
(HTTP 403). Permission **must** be checked prior to checking if the resource
exists.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested resource does not
exist, the service **must** error with `NOT_FOUND` (HTTP 404) unless
`allow_missing` is set to `true`.

## Changelog

- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2021-11-04**: Changed the permission check if `allow_missing` is set.
- **2021-07-08**: Added error guidance for resource not found case.
- **2021-03-05**: Changed the etag error from `FAILED_PRECONDITION` (which
  becomes HTTP 400) to `ABORTED` (409).
- **2020-10-06**: Added guidance for declarative-friendly resources.
- **2020-10-06**: Added guidance for `allow_missing`.
- **2020-08-14**: Added error guidance for permission denied cases.
- **2020-06-08**: Added guidance on returning the full resource.
- **2019-10-18**: Added guidance on annotations.
- **2019-09-10**: Added a link to the long-running operations AIP
  ([AIP-151][]).
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
- **2019-06-10**: Added guidance for long-running update.
- **2019-05-29**: Added an explicit prohibition on arbitrary fields in standard
  methods.
