---
id: 135
state: approved
created: 2019-01-24
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 50
---

# Standard methods: Delete

In REST APIs, it is customary to make a `DELETE` request to a resource's URI
(for example, `/v1/publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}`) in order to delete
that resource.

Resource-oriented design (AIP-121) honors this pattern through the `Delete`
method. These RPCs accept the URI representing that resource and usually return
an empty response.

## Guidance

APIs **should** generally provide a delete method for resources unless it is
not valuable for users to do so.

Delete methods are specified using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc DeleteBook(DeleteBookRequest) returns (google.protobuf.Empty) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    delete: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}"
  };
  option (google.api.method_signature) = "name";
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Delete`. The remainder of the
  RPC name **should** be the singular form of the resource's message name.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The response message **should** be `google.protobuf.Empty`.
  - If the resource is [soft deleted](#soft-delete), the response message
    **should** be the resource itself.
  - If the delete RPC is [long-running](#long-running-delete), the response
    message **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` which resolves to the
    correct response.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `DELETE`.
- The request message field receiving the resource name **should** map to the
  URI path.
  - This field **should** be called `name`.
  - The `name` field **should** be the only variable in the URI path. All
    remaining parameters **should** map to URI query parameters.
- There **must not** be a `body` key in the `google.api.http` annotation.
- There **should** be exactly one `google.api.method_signature` annotation,
  with a value of `"name"`. If an etag or force field are used, they **may** be
  included in the signature.

The Delete method **should** succeed if and only if a resource was present and
was successfully deleted. If the resource did not exist, the method **should**
send a `NOT_FOUND` error.

### Request message

Delete methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message DeleteBookRequest {
  // The name of the book to delete.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];
}
```

- A `name` field **must** be included. It **should** be called `name`.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] that it
    references.
- The comment for the field **should** document the resource pattern.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.

### Soft delete

**Note:** This material was moved into its own document to provide a more
comprehensive treatment: AIP-164.

### Long-running delete

Some resources take longer to delete a resource than is reasonable for a
regular API request. In this situation, the API **should** use a long-running
operation instead:

```proto
rpc DeleteBook(DeleteBookRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    delete: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "OperationMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The response type **must** be set to the appropriate return type if the RPC
  was not long-running: `google.protobuf.Empty` for most Delete RPCs, or the
  resource itself for soft delete (AIP-164).
- Both the `response_type` and `metadata_type` fields **must** be specified
  (even if they are `google.protobuf.Empty`).

**Note:** Declarative-friendly resources (AIP-128) **should** use long-running
delete.

### Cascading delete

Sometimes, it may be necessary for users to be able to delete a resource as
well as all applicable child resources. However, since deletion is usually
permanent, it is also important that users not do so accidentally, as
reconstructing wiped-out child resources may be quite difficult.

If an API allows deletion of a resource that may have child resources, the API
**should** provide a `bool force` field on the request, which the user sets to
explicitly opt in to a cascading delete.

```proto
message DeletePublisherRequest {
  // The name of the publisher to delete.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      type: "library.googleapis.com/Publisher"
    }];

  // If set to true, any books from this publisher will also be deleted.
  // (Otherwise, the request will only work if the publisher has no books.)
  bool force = 2;
}
```

The API **must** fail with a `FAILED_PRECONDITION` error if the `force` field
is `false` (or unset) and child resources are present.

### Protected delete

Sometimes, it may be necessary for users to ensure that no changes have been
made to a resource that is being deleted. If a resource provides an [etag][],
the delete request **may** accept the etag (as either required or optional):

```proto
message DeleteBookRequest {
  // The name of the book to delete.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // Optional. The etag of the book.
  // If this is provided, it must match the server's etag.
  string etag = 2;
}
```

If the etag is provided and does not match the server-computed etag, the
request **must** fail with a `ABORTED` error code.

**Note:** Declarative-friendly resources (AIP-128) **must** provide the `etag`
field for Delete requests.

### Delete if existing

If the service uses client-assigned resource names, `Delete` methods **may**
expose a `bool allow_missing` field, which will cause the method to succeed in
the event that the user attempts to delete a resource that is not present (in
which case the request is a no-op):

```proto
message DeleteBookRequest {
  // The book to delete.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference).type = "library.googleapis.com/Book"
  ];

  // If set to true, and the book is not found, the request will succeed
  // but no action will be taken on the server
  bool allow_missing = 2;
}
```

More specifically, the `allow_missing` flag triggers the following behavior:

- If the method call is on a resource that does not exist, the request is a
  no-op.
  - The `etag` field is ignored.
- If the method call is on a resource that already exists, the resource is
  deleted (subject to other checks).

**Note:** Declarative-friendly resources (AIP-128) **should** expose the
`bool allow_missing` field.

### Errors

If the user does not have permission to access the resource, regardless of
whether or not it exists, the service **must** error with `PERMISSION_DENIED`
(HTTP 403). Permission **must** be checked prior to checking if the resource
exists.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested resource does not
exist, the service **must** error with `NOT_FOUND` (HTTP 404) unless
`allow_missing` is set to `true`.

[aip-123]: ./0123.md
[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-136]: ./0136.md
[aip-154]: ./0154.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[aip-214]: ./0214.md
[aip-216]: ./0216.md
[etag]: ./0134.md#etags

## Further reading

- For soft delete and undelete, see AIP-164.
- For bulk deleting large numbers of resources based on a filter, see AIP-165.

## Changelog

- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2022-02-02**: Changed eTag error from `FAILED_PRECONDITION` to `ABORTED` making it consistent with change to [AIP-154][] & [AIP-134][etag] on 2021-03-05.
- **2020-10-06**: Added guidance for declarative-friendly resources.
- **2020-10-06**: Added guidance for allowing no-op delete for missing
  resources.
- **2020-10-06**: Moved soft delete and undelete guidance into a new AIP-164.
- **2020-06-08**: Added guidance for `Get` of soft-deleted resources.
- **2020-02-03**: Added guidance for error cases.
- **2019-10-18**: Added guidance on annotations.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
- **2019-06-10**: Added guidance for long-running delete.
- **2019-05-29**: Added an explicit prohibition on arbitrary fields in standard
  methods.
