---
id: 136
state: approved
created: 2019-01-25
updated: 2023-03-02
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 100
---

# Custom methods

Resource-oriented design (AIP-121) uses custom methods to provide a means to
express arbitrary actions that are difficult to model using only the standard
methods. Custom methods are important because they provide a means for an API's
vocabulary to adhere to user intent.

## Guidance

Custom methods **should** only be used for functionality that can not be easily
expressed via standard methods; prefer standard methods if possible, due to
their consistent semantics. (Of course, this only applies if the functionality
in question actually conforms to the normal semantics; it is _not_ a good idea
to contort things to endeavor to make the standard methods "sort of work".)

While custom methods vary widely in how they are designed, many principles
apply consistently:

```proto
// Archives the given book.
rpc ArchiveBook(ArchiveBookRequest) returns (ArchiveBookResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:archive"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

**Note:** The pattern above shows a custom method that operates on a specific
resource. Custom methods can be associated with resources, collections, or
services. The bullets below apply in all three cases.

- The name of the method **should** be a verb followed by a noun.
  - The name **must not** contain prepositions ("for", "with", etc.).
  - The verb in the name **should not** contain any of the standard method verbs ([Get][],
    [List][], [Create][], [Update][], [Delete][]).
  - The name **must not** include the term `Async`. Instead, if the intention is
    to differentiate between immediate and long-running RPCs, the suffix `LongRunning`
    **may** be used for this purpose. For example, to create a long-running book creation
    RPC (if the standard `CreateBook` method was designed before long-running aspects were
    considered), a custom `CreateBookLongRunning` method could be introduced.
- The HTTP method **must** be `GET` or `POST`:
  - `GET` **must** be used for methods retrieving data or resource state.
  - `POST` **must** be used if the method has side effects or mutates resources
    or data.
- The HTTP URI **must** use a `:` character followed by the custom verb
  (`:archive` in the above example), and the verb in the URI **must** match the
  verb in the name of the RPC.
  - If word separation is required, `camelCase` **must** be used.
- The `body` clause in the `google.api.http` annotation **should** be `"*"`.
  - However, if using `GET`, the `body` clause **must** be absent.
- Custom methods **should** take a request message matching the RPC
  name, with a `Request` suffix.
- Custom methods **should** return a response message matching the RPC
  name, with a `Response` suffix.
  - When operating on a specific resource, a custom method **may** return the
    resource itself.


### Resource-based custom methods

Custom methods **must** operate on a resource if the API can be modeled
as such:

```proto
// Archives the given book.
rpc ArchiveBook(ArchiveBookRequest) returns (ArchiveBookResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:archive"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- The parameter for the resource's name **must** be called `name`, and
  be the only variable in the URI path.

### Collection-based custom methods

While most custom methods operate on a single resource, some custom methods
**may** operate on a collection instead:

```proto
// Sorts the books from this publisher.
rpc SortBooks(SortBooksRequest) returns (SortBooksResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:sort"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- The collection's parent resource **must** be called `parent`, and
  be the only variable in the URI path.
- The collection key (`books` in the above example) **must** be literal.

### Stateless methods

Some custom methods are not attached to resources at all. These methods are
generally _stateless_: they accept a request and return a response, and have no
permanent effect on data within the API.

```proto
// Translates the provided text from one language to another.
rpc TranslateText(TranslateTextRequest) returns (TranslateTextResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{project=projects/*}:translateText"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- If the method runs in a particular scope (such as a project, as in the above
  example), the field name in the request message **should** be the name of the
  scope resource. If word separators are necessary, `snake_case` **must** be
  used.
- The URI **should** place both the verb and noun after the `:` separator
  (avoid a "faux collection key" in the URI in this case, as there is no
  collection). For example, `:translateText` is preferable to `text:translate`.
- Stateless methods **must** use `POST` if they involve billing.

### Declarative-friendly resources

Declarative-friendly resources usually **should not** employ custom methods
(except specific declarative-friendly custom methods discussed in other AIPs),
because declarative-friendly tools are unable to automatically determine what
to do with them.

An exception to this is for rarely-used, fundamentally imperative operations,
such as a `Move` or `Rename` operation, for which there would not be an
expectation of declarative support.

## Rationale

### HTTP path

Similar to standard methods, a custom method that operates on a resource or
collection needs a `name` or `parent` parameter to indicate the resource that it
operates on. This convention allows clients to map custom methods to the
appropriate resource.

### HTTP methods

Allowing both `GET` and `POST` HTTP verbs allows a clear distinction for
which methods do not mutate data, and which ones do. Methods that only
read data have first-class concepts in some clients (DataSources in
Terraform) and clearly indicate to a user which methods can be called
without risk of runtime impact.


[get]: ./0131.md
[list]: ./0132.md
[create]: ./0133.md
[update]: ./0134.md
[delete]: ./0135.md

### RPC name

The term "async" is commonly used in programming languages to indicate whether
a specific method call is synchronous or asynchronous, including for making RPCs.
That sync/async aspect is at a different abstraction level to whether the RPC
itself is intended to start a long-running operation. Using "async" within the
RPC name itself causes confusion, and can even cause issues for client libraries
which generate both synchronous and asynchronous methods to call the RPC in some
languages.

## Changelog

- **2023-05-16:** Added prohibition of the term "async" within RPC names.
- **2023-05-09:** Adding guidance for POST and GET, require parent instead of
  the resource singular.
- **2023-03-02:** Explicitly discourage use of standard method verbs.
- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2020-10-06:** Added declarative-friendly guidance.
- **2019-08-01:** Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
