---
id: 140
state: approved
created: 2019-07-22
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 0
---

# Field names

Naming fields in a way that is intuitive to users can often be one of the most
challenging aspects of designing an API. This is true for many reasons; often a
field name that seems entirely intuitive to the author can baffle a reader.

Additionally, users rarely use only one API; they use many APIs together. As a
result, a single company using the same name to mean different things (or
different names to mean the same thing) can often cause unnecessary confusion,
because users can no longer take what they've already learned from one API and
apply that to another.

In short, APIs are easiest to understand when field names are simple,
intuitive, and consistent with one another.

## Guidance

Field names **should** be in correct American English.

Field names **should** clearly and precisely communicate the concept being
presented and avoid overly general names that are ambiguous. That said, field
names **should** avoid including unnecessary words. In particular, avoid
including adjectives that always apply and add little cognitive value. For
example, a `proxy_settings` field might be as helpful as
`shared_proxy_settings` if there is no unshared variant.

**Important:** Field names often appear in generated client surfaces. Ensure they 
are appropriately descriptive and of suitable length.

### Case

Field definitions in protobuf files **must** use `lower_snake_case` names.
These names are mapped to an appropriate naming convention in JSON and in
generated code.

Additionally, each word in the field **must not** begin with a number, because
it creates ambiguity when converting between snake case and camel case.
Similarly, fields **must not** contain leading, trailing, or adjacent
underscores.

### Uniformity

APIs **should** endeavor to use the same name for the same concept and
different names for different concepts wherever possible. This includes names
across multiple APIs, in particular if those APIs are likely to be used
together.

### Repeated fields

Repeated fields **must** use the proper plural form, such as `books` or
`authors`. On the other hand, non-repeated fields **should** use the singular
form such as `book` or `author`. This implies that resource names **should**
use the singular form as well, since the field name should follow the resource
name (e.g., use `repeated Book books`, **not** `Books books = 1`).

### Prepositions

Field names **should not** include prepositions (such as "with", "for", "at",
"by", etc). For example:

- `error_reason` (**not** `reason_for_error`)
- `author` (**not** `written_by`)

It is easier for field names to match more often when following this
convention. Additionally, prepositions in field names may also indicate a
design concern, such as an overly-restrictive field or a sub-optimal data type.
This is particularly true regarding "with": a field named `book_with_publisher`
likely indicates that the book resource may be improperly structured and worth
redesigning.

**Note:** The word "per" is an exception to this rule, particularly in two
cases. Often "per" is part of a unit (e.g. "miles per hour"), in which case the
preposition must be present to accurately convey the unit. Additionally, "per"
is often appropriate in reporting scenarios (e.g. "nodes per instance" or
"failures per hour").

### Adjectives

For uniformity, field names that contain both a noun and an adjective
**should** place the adjective _before_ the noun. For example:

- `collected_items` (**not** `items_collected`)
- `imported_objects` (**not** `objects_imported`)

### Verbs

Field names **must not** be named to reflect an intent or action. They
**must not** be verbs. Rather, because the field defines the *desired
value* for mutations, e.g. Create and Update, and the *current value*
for reads, e.g.  Get and List, the name **must** be a noun. It defines
what is so, not what to do.

- `collected_items` (**not** `collect_items`)
- `disabled` (**not** `disable`)

In contrast, method names, whether standard or custom, change facets of
resources and are named as verbs.

### Booleans

Boolean fields **should** omit the prefix "is". For example:

- `disabled` (**not** `is_disabled`)
- `required` (**not** `is_required`)

**Note:** Field names that would otherwise be [reserved words](#reserved-words)
are an exception to this rule. For example, `is_new` (**not** `new`).

### String vs. bytes

When using `bytes`, the contents of the field are base64-encoded when using
JSON on the wire. Services **should** use `bytes` when there is a need to send
binary contents over the wire, and **should not** ask the user to manually
base64-encode a field into a `string` field. The one exception is when the
API is designed to handle data that is meant to be base64-encoded at rest and
the double base64-encoding as a result of using `bytes` is undesirable - in
this case, services **may** use a `string`.

### URIs

Field names representing URLs or URIs **should** always use `uri` rather than
`url`. This is because while all URLs are URIs, not all URIs are URLs. Field
names **may** use a prefix in front of `uri` as appropriate.

### Reserved words

Field names **should** avoid using names that are likely to conflict with
keywords in common programming languages, such as `new`, `class`, `function`,
`import`, etc. Reserved keywords can cause hardship for developers using the
API in that language.

### Conflicts

Messages **should not** include a field with the same name as the enclosing
message (ignoring case transformations). This causes conflicts when generating
code in some languages.

### Display names

Many resources have a human-readable name, often used for display in UI. This
field **should** be called `display_name`, and **should not** have a uniqueness
requirement.

If an entity has an official, formal name (such as a company name or the title
of a book), an API **may** use `title` as the field name instead. The `title`
field **should not** have a uniqueness requirement.

## Further reading

- For naming resource fields, see [AIP-122][].
- For naming fields representing quantities, see [AIP-141][].
- For naming fields representing time, see [AIP-142][].

## Changelog

- **2024-08-26**: Codify exception to string and base64 guidance 
- **2024-05-18**: Documented the effect of field names on client surfaces.
- **2023-04-25**: Field names **must not** be expressed as verbs.
- **2021-07-12**: Normalized display name guidance to "should".
- **2021-04-07**: Added base64 and bytes guidance.
- **2021-03-05**: Added prohibition on leading, trailing, or adjacent
  underscores.
- **2020-06-10**: Added prohibition on starting any word with a number.
- **2020-05-29**: Added guidance around URIs.
- **2020-03-24**: Added guidance around conflicting field and message names.
- **2020-01-30**: Added guidance around `display_name` and `title`.

[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[aip-141]: ./0141.md
[aip-142]: ./0142.md
