---
id: 141
state: approved
created: 2019-07-18
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 20
---

# Quantities

Many services need to represent a discrete quantity of items (number of bytes,
number of miles, number of nodes, etc.).

## Guidance

Quantities with a clear unit of measurement (such as bytes, miles, and so on)
**must** include the unit of measurement as the suffix. When appropriate, units
**should** use generally accepted abbreviations, and abbreviations **should not** 
be pluralized (for example, `distance_km` rather than `distance_kilometers`). 

```proto
// A representation of a non-stop air route.
message Route {
  // The airport where the route begins.
  string origin = 1;

  // The destination airport.
  string destination = 2;

  // The distance between the origin and destination airports.
  // This value is also used to determine the credited frequent flyer miles.
  int32 distance_miles = 3;
}
```

If the quantity is a number of items (for example, the number of nodes in a
cluster), then the field **should** use the suffix `_count` (**not** the prefix
`num_`):

```proto
// A cluster of individual nodes.
message Cluster {
  // The number of nodes in the cluster.
  int32 node_count = 1;
}
```

**Note:** Fields **must not** use unsigned integer types, because many
programming languages and systems do not support them well.

### Compound units

Quantities with compound units of measurement **may** use separating underscores
between units as needed for clarity. Unabbreviated units **must** be separated.
Abbreviated units **should not** be separated unless otherwise ambiguous.
Compound units **should** be in plural form, with all component units in 
singular form except for the final component unit, which should be in plural 
form unless abbreviated.

- `energy_kwh` (**not** `energy_kw_h`)
- `energy_kw_fortnights` (**not** `energy_kwfortnight` or `energy_kw_fortnight`)

**Note:** Metric prefixes **must not** be separated from their base unit.

### Inverse units

Quantities with units of measurement that are or include inverse units
**should** indicate all inverse units as a compound unit after a compound
of any non-inverse units, separated by the word "per".
The inverse compound unit **should** be in singular form.

- `speed_miles_per_hour` (**not** `speed_mph`)
- `speed_meters_per_second` (**not** `speed_meters_per_seconds` or `speed_meter_per_second`)
- `event_count_per_hour` (**not** `events_per_hour`, `event_counts_per_hour`, or `hourly_events`)
- `price_per_kwh` (using [`google.type.Money`][money])

**Note:** This guidance does not apply in cases where generally accepted derived
units with special names and symbols exist for inverse quantities. For example,
the derived unit 'hertz' **should** be used when appropriate for reciprocal time.

### Specialized messages

It is sometimes useful to create a message that represents a particular
quantity. This is particularly valuable in two situations:

- Grouping two or more individual quantities together. Example:
  [`google.protobuf.Duration`][duration]
- Representing a common concept where the unit of measurement may itself vary.
  Example: [`google.type.Money`][money]

APIs **may** create messages to represent quantities when appropriate. When
using these messages as fields, APIs **should** use the name of the message as
the suffix for the field name if it makes intuitive sense to do so.

## Changelog

- **2025-07-09**: Added guidance for compound units.
- **2025-07-09**: Clarified guidance to not pluralize abbreviated units.
- **2025-07-09**: Clarified guidance to use per_ prefix to represent inverse units.
- **2019-09-13**: Added the prohibition on uint and fixed types.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[duration]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/duration.proto
[money]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/money.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
