---
id: 145
state: approved
created: 2020-05-28
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 60
---

# Ranges

Services often need to represent ranges of discrete or continuous values. These
have wide differences in meaning, and come in many types: integers, floats, and
timestamps, just to name a few, and the expected meaning of a range can vary in
subtle ways depending on the type of range being discussed.

## Guidance

A resource or message representing a range **should** ordinarily use two
separate fields of the same type, with prefixes `start_` and `end_`:

```proto
// A representation of a chapter in a book.
message Chapter {
  string title = 1;

  // The page where this chapter begins.
  int32 start_page = 2;

  // The page where the next chapter or section begins.
  int32 end_page = 3;
}
```

### Inclusive or exclusive ranges

Fields representing ranges **should** use inclusive start values and exclusive
end values (half-closed intervals) in most situations; in interval notation:
`[start_xxx, end_xxx)`.

Exclusive end values are preferable for the following reasons:

- It conforms to user expectations, particularly for continuous values such as
  timestamps, and avoids the need to express imprecise "limit values" (e.g.
  `2012-04-20T23:59:59`).
- It is consistent with most common programming languages, including C++, Java,
  Python, and Go.
- It is easier to reason about abutting ranges: `[0, x), [x, y), [y, z)`, where
  values are chainable from one range to the next.

### Timestamp intervals

The following section describes the use of the [google.type.Interval][interval]
type, found amongst the common protos that are described in [AIP-213][].
This type represents a range between two timestamps, with an inclusive start
value and exclusive end value.

Ranges between two timestamps which conform to the expectations of the
`Interval` message **should** use this rather than having separate start and
end fields. This allows client code to be written against the `Interval`
message (such as checking whether a given timestamp occurs within the interval)
and reused across multiple intervals in the same API, or even across multiple
APIs.

APIs **may** use start and end timestamp fields instead. In particular, if a
message within an API is inherently describing an interval with extra
information about that interval, the additional level of nesting introduced
by using the `Interval` message may be undesirable.

### Exceptions

In some cases, there is significant colloquial precedent for inclusive start
and end values (closed intervals), to the point that using an exclusive end
value would be confusing even for people accustomed to them.

For example, when discussing dates (not to be confused with timestamps), most
people use inclusive end: a conference with dates "April 21-23" is expected to
run for three days: April 21, April 22, and April 23. This is also true for
days of the week: a business that is open "Monday through Friday" is open, not
closed, on Fridays.

In this situation, the prefixes `first` and `last` **should** be used instead:

```proto
// A representation of a chapter in a book.
message Chapter {
  string title = 1;

  // The first page of the chapter.
  int32 first_page = 2;

  // The last page of the chapter.
  int32 last_page = 3;
}
```

Fields representing ranges with significant colloquial precedent for inclusive
start and end values **should** use inclusive end values with `first_` and
`last_` prefixes for those ranges only. The service **should** still use
exclusive end values for other ranges where this does not apply, and **must**
clearly document each range as inclusive or exclusive.

[aip-213]: ./0213.md
[interval]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/interval.proto
