---
id: 146
state: approved
created: 2019-05-28
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 70
---

# Generic fields

Most fields in any API, whether in a request, a resource, or a custom response,
have a specific type or schema. This schema is part of the contract that
developers write their code against.

However, occasionally it is appropriate to have a generic or polymorphic field
of some kind that can conform to multiple schemata, or even be entirely
free-form.

## Guidance

While generic fields are generally rare, a service **may** introduce generic
field where necessary. There are several approaches to this depending on how
generic the field needs to be; in general, services **should** attempt to
introduce the "least generic" approach that is able to satisfy the use case.

### Oneof

A `oneof` **may** be used to introduce a type union: the user or service is
able to specify one of the fields inside the `oneof`. Additionally, a `oneof`
**may** be used with the same type (usually strings) to represent a semantic
difference between the options.

Because the individual fields in the `oneof` have different keys, a developer
can programmatically determine which (if any) of the fields is populated.

A `oneof` preserves the largest degree of type safety and semantic meaning for
each option, and services **should** generally prefer them over other generic
or polymorphic options when feasible. However, the `oneof` construct is
ill-suited when there is a large (or unlimited) number of potential options, or
when there is a large resource structure that would require a long series of
"cascading oneofs".

**Note:** Adding additional possible fields to an existing `oneof` is a
non-breaking change, but moving existing fields into or out of a `oneof` is
breaking (it creates a backwards-incompatible change in Go protobuf stubs).

### Maps

Maps **may** be used in situations where a situation where many values _of the
same type_ are needed, but the keys are unknown or user-determined.

Maps are usually not appropriate for generic fields because the map values all
share a type, but occasionally they are useful. In particular, a map can
sometimes be suited to a situation where many objects of the same type are
needed, with different behavior based on the names of their keys (for example,
using keys as environment names).

### Struct

The [`google.protobuf.Struct`][] object **may** be used to represent arbitrary
nested JSON. Keys can be strings, and values can be floats, strings, booleans,
arrays, or additional nested structs, allowing for an arbitrarily nested
structure that can be represented as JSON (and is automatically represented as
JSON when using REST/JSON).

A `Struct` is most useful when the service does not know the schema in advance,
or when a service needs to store and retrieve arbitrary but structured user
data. Using a `Struct` is convenient for users in this case because they can
easily get JSON objects that can be natively manipulated in their environment
of choice.

If a service needs to reason about the _schema_ of a `Struct`, it **should**
use [JSONSchema][] for this purpose. Because JSONSchema is itself JSON, a valid
JSONSchema document can itself be stored in a `Struct`.

### Any

The [`google.protobuf.Any`][] object can be used to send an arbitrary
serialized protocol buffer and a type definition.

However, this introduces complexity, because an `Any` becomes useless for any
task other than blind data propagation if the consumer does not have access to
the proto. Additionally, even if the consumer _does_ have the proto, the
consumer has to ensure the type is registered and then deserialize manually,
which is an often-unfamiliar process.

Because of this, `Any` **should not** be used unless other options are
infeasible.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[`google.protobuf.Any`]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/master/src/google/protobuf/any.proto
[`google.protobuf.Struct`]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/master/src/google/protobuf/struct.proto
[JSONSchema]: https://json-schema.org/
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
