---
id: 148
state: reviewing
created: 2020-09-14
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 90
---

# Standard fields

Certain concepts are common throughout any corpus of APIs. In these situations,
it is useful to have a standard field name that is used consistently to
communicate that concept.

## Guidance

Standard fields **should** be used to describe their corresponding concept, and
**should not** be used for any other purpose.

### Resource names and IDs

#### name

Every resource **must** have a `string name` field, used for the resource name
(AIP-122), which **should** be the first field in the resource.

**Note:** The `_name` suffix **should not** be used to describe other types of
names unless otherwise covered in this AIP.

#### parent

The `string parent` field refers to the resource name of the parent of a
collection, and **should** be used in most `List` (AIP-132) and `Create`
(AIP-133) requests.

#### uid

The `string uid` field refers to a system-assigned, unique identifier for a
resource. When provided, this field **should** be a [UUID4][].
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
[uuid4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier#Version_4_(random)

#### short_name

The `string short_name` field **must** refer to a short, human-friendly value
that uniquely identifies a resource of a specific type within a namespace.
Policies **may** reference resources by using their short name as the final
component of the resource name.

**Note:** Short names **should** be immutable, because policies of various
types might reference resources using the short name, and mutable short names
have the potential to cause reference confusion.

**Note:** A short name does not represent a general alias because it is
immutable, and the resource type is required context.

### Other names

#### display_name

The `string display_name` field **must** be a mutable, user-settable field
where the user can provide a human-readable name to be used in user interfaces.
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

Display names **should not** have uniqueness requirements, and **should** be
limited to <= 63 characters.

#### title

The `string title` field **should** be the official name of an entity, such as
a company's name. This is a more formal variant of `string display_name`.

#### given_name

The `string given_name` field **must** refer to a human or animal's given name.
Resources **must not** use `first_name` for this concept, because the given
name is not placed first in many cultures.

#### family_name

The `string family_name` field **must** refer to a human or animal's family
name. Resources **must not** use `last_name` for this concept, because the
family name is not placed last in many cultures.

### Lifecycle

#### deleted

The output only `bool deleted` field **must** be provided on resources that
support soft delete (AIP-135), and set to `true` if the resource is currently
soft deleted.

### Timestamps

#### create_time

The output only `google.protobuf.Timestamp create_time` field **must**
represent the timestamp when the resource was created. This **may** be either
the time creation was initiated or the time it was completed.
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

#### update_time

The output only `google.protobuf.Timestamp update_time` field **must**
represent the timestamp when the resource was most recently updated. Any change
to the resource made by users **must** refresh this value; changes to a
resource made internally by the service **may** refresh this value.
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

#### delete_time

The `google.protobuf.Timestamp delete_time` field **must** represent the
timestamp that a resource was soft deleted. This **may** correspond to either
the time when the user requested deletion, or when the service successfully
soft deleted the resource. If a resource is not soft deleted, the `delete_time`
field **must** be empty.

Resources that support soft delete (AIP-164) **should** provide this field.

#### expire_time

The `google.protobuf.Timestamp expire_time` field **should** usually represent
the time when a soft deleted resource will be purged from the system. It
**may** be used for similar forms of expiration as described in AIP-214.
Resources that support soft delete **should** include this field.

In some situations, it can be difficult to provide an exact `expire_time`
value, because of implementation dependencies. Services **may** provide an
`expire_time` value that is inexact, but the resource **must not** be expired
from the system before that time.

Resources that support soft delete (AIP-164) **should** provide this field.

## Further reading

[declarative-friendly resources]: ./0128.md#resources
