---
id: 148
state: approved
created: 2020-10-06
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 90
---

# Standard fields

Certain concepts are common throughout any corpus of APIs. In these situations,
it is useful to have a standard field name and behavior that is used
consistently to communicate that concept.

## Guidance

Standard fields **should** be used to describe their corresponding concept, and
**should not** be used for any other purpose.

### Resource names and IDs

#### name

Every resource **must** have a `string name` field, used for the resource name
(AIP-122), which **should** be the first field in the resource.

**Note:** The `_name` suffix **should not** be used to describe other types of
names unless otherwise covered in this AIP.

#### parent

The `string parent` field refers to the resource name of the parent of a
collection, and **should** be used in most `List` (AIP-132) and `Create`
(AIP-133) requests.

### Other names

#### display_name

The `string display_name` field **must** be a mutable, user-settable field
where the user can provide a human-readable name to be used in user interfaces.
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

Display names **should not** have uniqueness requirements, and **should** be
limited to <= 63 characters.

#### title

The `string title` field **should** be the official name of an entity, such as
a company's name. This is a more formal variant of `string display_name`.

#### given_name

The `string given_name` field **must** refer to a human or animal's given name.
Resources **must not** use `first_name` for this concept, because the given
name is not placed first in many cultures.

#### family_name

The `string family_name` field **must** refer to a human or animal's family
name. Resources **must not** use `last_name` for this concept, because the
family name is not placed last in many cultures.

### Timestamps

#### create_time

The output only `google.protobuf.Timestamp create_time` field **must**
represent the timestamp when the resource was created. This **may** be either
the time creation was initiated or the time it was completed.
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

#### update_time

The output only `google.protobuf.Timestamp update_time` field **must**
represent the timestamp when the resource was most recently updated. Any change
to the resource made by users **must** refresh this value; changes to a
resource made internally by the service **may** refresh this value.
[Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this field.

#### delete_time

The output only `google.protobuf.Timestamp delete_time` field **must** represent
the timestamp that a resource was soft deleted. This **may** correspond to either
the time when the user requested deletion, or when the service successfully
soft deleted the resource. If a resource is not soft deleted, the `delete_time`
field **must** be empty.

Resources that support soft delete (AIP-164) **should** provide this field.

#### expire_time

The `google.protobuf.Timestamp expire_time` field **should** represent the time
that a given resource or resource attribute is no longer useful or valid (e.g. a
rotating security key). It **may** be used for similar forms of expiration as
described in AIP-214.

Services **may** provide an `expire_time` value that is inexact, but the
resource **must not** expire before that time.

#### purge_time

The `google.protobuf.Timestamp purge_time` field **should** represent the time
when a soft deleted resource will be purged from the system (see AIP-164).
It **may** be used for similar forms of expiration as described in AIP-214.
Resources that support soft delete **should** include this field.

Services **may** provide a `purge_time` value that is inexact, but the resource
**must not** be purged from the system before that time.

### Annotations

To store small amounts of arbitrary data, a `map<string, string> annotations`
field **may** be added.

The `annotations` field **must** use the [Kubernetes limits][] to maintain wire
compatibility, and **should** require dot-namespaced annotation keys to prevent
tools from trampling over one another.

Examples of information that might be valuable to store in annotations include:

- For CI/CD, an identifier of the pipeline run or version control identifier
  used to propagate.

**Note:** Annotations are distinct from various forms of labels. Labels can be
used by server-side policies, such as IAM conditions. Annotations exist to
allow client tools to store their own state information without requiring a
database.

### Well known string fields

#### IP address

A field that represents an IP address **must** comply with the following:

* use type `string`
* use the name `ip_address` or end with the suffix `_ip_address` e.g.
  `resolved_ip_address`
* specify the IP address version format via one of the supported formats `IPV4`,
  `IPV6`, or if it can be either, `IPV4_OR_IPV6` (see [AIP-202][aip-202])

#### uid

The output only `string uid` field refers to a system-assigned unique
identifier for a resource. When provided, this field **must** be a [UUID4][]
and **must** specify this format via the `UUID4` format extension (see
[AIP-202][aip-202]). [Declarative-friendly resources][] **should** include this
field.

## Further reading

- For standardized codes, see AIP-143.
- For the `etag` field, see AIP-154.
- For the `request_id` field, see AIP-155.
- For the `filter` field, see AIP-160.
- For fields related to resource revisions, see AIP-162.
- For the `validate_only` field, see AIP-163.
- For fields related to soft delete and undelete, see AIP-164.

## Rationale

### Well known string fields

Some fields represent very well defined concepts or artifacts that sometimes
also have strict governance of their semantics. For such fields, presenting an
equally standardized API surface is important. This enables development of
improved API consumer tools and documentation, as well as a more unified user
experience across the platform.

## History

Before 2023-07, `purge_time` for soft-deleted resources was also called
`expire_time`. `purge_time` was introduced to reduce user confusion.

## Changelog

- **2023-10-05**: Introduce well known string fields with IP Address and `uid`.
- **2023-08-14**: Introduce the term `annotations` from AIP-128.
- **2023-07-13**: Introduce the term `purge_time`.
- **2021-04-06**: Require output only field behavior for `uid` and `delete_time`
  fields.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
[aip-202]: ./0202.md
[declarative-friendly resources]: ./0128.md#resources
[kubernetes limits]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/#syntax-and-character-set
[uuid4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier#Version_4_(random)