---
id: 152
state: approved
created: 2020-04-27
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 10
---

# Jobs

Occasionally, APIs may need to expose a task that takes significant time to
complete, and where a transient [long-running operation][aip-151] is not
appropriate. For example, a task could need to run repeatedly, or have separate
permissions for configuring the task as opposed to running it.

## Guidance

An API **may** define a `Job` resource to represent a particular task with
distinct setup, configuration, and execution:

```proto
message WriteBookJob {
  // The resource name for the writing job.
  string name = 1 [(google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/WriteBookJob"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/writeBookJobs/{write_book_job}"
  }];

  // Additional configuration...
}
```

- The name of the resource **must** end with the word "Job".
  - The prefix **should** be a valid RPC name, with a verb and a noun.
- The service **should** define all five of the standard methods (AIP-131,
  AIP-132, AIP-133, AIP-134, AIP-135), and use them as the
  primary way to configure the job.

### Run method

The service **should** define a `Run` custom method that executes the job
immediately:

```proto
rpc RunWriteBookJob(RunWriteBookJobRequest)
    returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/writeBookJobs/*}:run"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "RunWriteBookJobResponse"
    metadata_type: "RunWriteBookJobMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Run`. The remainder of the
  RPC name **should** be the singular form of the job resource being run.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The method **should** return a [long-running operation][aip-151], which
  **must** resolve to a response message that includes the result of running
  the job.
  - The response message name must match the RPC name, with a `Response`
    suffix.
  - The method **may** use any metadata message it wishes.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`, as is usual for [custom methods][aip-136].
- The body clause in the `google.api.http` annotation **should** be `"*"`.
- The URI path **should** contain a single `name` variable corresponding to the
  name of the job resource being run.
- The URI path **must** end with `:run`.
- Errors that prevent execution of the job from _starting_ **must** return an
  error response (AIP-193), similar to any other method. Errors that occur
  over the course of the job execution **may** be placed in the metadata
  message. The errors themselves **must** still be represented with a
  [`google.rpc.Status`][status] object.

### Run request message

Run methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message RunWriteBookJobRequest {
  // The name of the job to run.
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      type: "library.googleapis.com/WriteBookJob"
    }];
}
```

- A singular `string name` field **must** be included.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] that it
    references.

### Executions and results

Ordinarily, the API **should** provide results to the user as the final
response of the `Run` method. However, this is sometimes insufficient; for
example, a job that runs on a recurring schedule in the background can not
deliver results to the user in this way.

The service **may** store resources representing individual executions along
with their result as a sub-collection of resources under the job, which allows
the user to list past job executions. A service that does this **should**
define the `Get`, `List`, and `Delete` methods for the execution resources:

```proto
message WriteBookJobExecution {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/WriteBookJobExecution"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/writeBookJobs/{write_book_job}/executions/{execution}"
  };

  string name = 1;

  // Other information about the execution, such as metadata, the result,
  // error information, etc.
}
```

In this case, the operation returned by job's `Run` method **should** refer to
the child resource.

## Changelog

- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2020-11-02**: Expanded guidance on HTTP, field behavior, and resource
  reference annotations and request format.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-123]: ./0123.md
[aip-136]: ./0136.md
[aip-151]: ./0151.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[status]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/status.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
