---
id: 154
state: approved
created: 2019-07-24
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 30
---

# Resource freshness validation

APIs often need to validate that a client and server agree on the current state
of a resource before taking some kind of action on that resource. For example,
two processes updating the same resource in parallel could create a race
condition, where the latter process "stomps over" the effort of the former one.

ETags provide a way to deal with this, by allowing the server to send a
checksum based on the current content of a resource; when the client sends that
checksum back, the server can ensure that the checksums match before acting on
the request.

## Guidance

A resource **may** include an `etag` field on any resource where it is
important to ensure that the client has an up to date resource before acting on
certain requests:

```proto
// A representation of a book.
message Book {
  // Other fields...

  // This checksum is computed by the server based on the value of other
  // fields, and may be sent on update and delete requests to ensure the
  // client has an up-to-date value before proceeding.
  string etag = 99;
}
```

- The etag field **must** be a string, and **must** be named `etag`.
- The etag field on the _resource_ **should not** be given any behavior
  annotations.
- The etag field **must** be provided by the server on output, and values
  **should** conform to [RFC 7232][].
- If a user sends back an etag which matches the current etag value, the
  service **must** permit the request (unless there is some other reason for
  failure).
- If a user sends back an etag which does not match the current etag value, the
  service **must** send an `ABORTED` error response (unless another error takes
  precedence, such as `PERMISSION_DENIED` if the user is not authorized).
- If the user does not send an etag value at all, the service **should** permit
  the request. However, services with strong consistency or parallelism
  requirements **may** require users to send etags all the time and reject the
  request with an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error in this case.

**Note:** ETag values **should** include quotes as described in [RFC 7232][].
For example, a valid etag is `"foo"`, not `foo`.

### Declarative-friendly resources

A resource that is declarative-friendly (AIP-128) **must** include an `etag`
field.

### Etags on request methods

In some situations, the etag needs to belong on a request message rather than
the resource itself. For example, an `Update` standard method can "piggyback"
off the `etag` field on the resource, but the `Delete` standard method can not:

```proto
message DeleteBookRequest {
  // The name of the book.
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The current etag of the book.
  // If an etag is provided and does not match the current etag of the book,
  // deletion will be blocked and an ABORTED error will be returned.
  string etag = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OPTIONAL];
}
```

On a request message, the `etag` field **should** be given a behavior annotation
- either `REQUIRED` or `OPTIONAL`. See AIP-203 for more information.

An `etag` field **may** also be used on custom methods, similar to the example
above.

### Strong and weak etags

ETags can be either "strongly validated" or "weakly validated":

- A strongly validated etag means that two resources bearing the same etag are
  byte-for-byte identical.
- A weakly validated etag means that two resources bearing the same etag are
  equivalent, but may differ in ways that the service does not consider to be
  important.

Resources **may** use either strong or weak etags, as it sees fit, but
**should** document the behavior. Additionally, weak etags **must** have a `W/`
prefix as mandated by [RFC 7232][].

[rfc 7232]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7232#section-2.3

## Further reading

- For how to retry on errors in client libraries, see AIP-194.

## Changelog
- **2021-04-01**: Updated an additional reference to `FAILED_PRECONDITION`
  to `ABORTED`.
- **2021-03-05**: Changed the etag error from `FAILED_PRECONDITION` (which
  becomes HTTP 400) to `ABORTED` (409).
- **2020-10-06**: Added declarative-friendly resource requirement.
- **2020-09-02**: Clarified that other errors may take precedence over
  `FAILED_PRECONDITION` for etag mismatches.
- **2020-09-02**: Add guidance for etags on request messages.
- **2019-09-23**: Changed the title to "resource freshness validation".
