---
id: 156
state: approved
created: 2019-05-12
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 70
---

# Singleton resources

APIs sometimes need to represent a resource where exactly one instance of the
resource always exists within any given parent. A common use case for this is
for a config object.

## Guidance

An API **may** define _singleton resources_. A singleton resource **must**
always exist by virtue of the existence of its parent, with one and exactly one
per parent.

For example:

```proto
message Config {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "api.googleapis.com/Config"
    pattern: "users/{user}/config"
    singular: "config"
    plural: "configs"
  };

  // additional fields including name
}
```

The `Config` singleton would have the following RPCs:

```proto
rpc GetConfig(GetConfigRequest) returns (Config) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    get: "/v1/{name=users/*/config}"
  };
}

rpc UpdateConfig(UpdateConfigRequest) returns (Config) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    patch: "/v1/{config.name=users/*/config}"
    body: "config"
  };
}
```

- Singleton resources **must not** have a user-provided or system-generated ID;
  their [resource name][aip-122] includes the name of their parent followed by
  one static-segment.
  - Example: `users/1234/config`
- Singleton resources are always singular.
  - Example: `users/1234/thing`
- Singleton resource definitions **must** provide both the `singular` and
  `plural` fields (see above example).
- Singleton resources **may** parent other resources.
- Singleton resources **must not** define the [`Create`][aip-133] or
  [`Delete`][aip-135] standard methods. The singleton is implicitly created or
  deleted when its parent is created or deleted.
- Singleton resources **should** define the [`Get`][aip-131] and
  [`Update`][aip-134] methods, and **may** define custom methods as
  appropriate.
  - However, singleton resources **must not** define the [`Update`][aip-134]
    method if all fields on the resource are [output only][aip-203].
- Singleton resources **may** define the [`List`][aip-132] method, but **must**
  implement it according to [AIP-159][aip-159]. See the example below.
  - The trailing segment in the path pattern that typically represents the
    collection **should** be the `plural` form of the Singleton resource e.g.
    `/v1/{parent=users/*}/configs`.
  - If a parent resource ID is provided instead of the hyphen `-` as per
    AIP-159, then the service **should** return a collection of one Singleton
    resource corresponding to the specified parent resource.

```proto
rpc ListConfigs(ListConfigsRequest) returns (ListConfigsResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    get: "/v1/{parent=users/*}/configs"
  };
}

message ListConfigsRequest {
  // To list all configs, use `-` as the user id.
  // Formats:
  // * `users/-`
  // * `users/{user}`
  //
  // Note: Specifying an actual user id will return a collection of one config.
  // Use GetConfig instead.
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.resource_reference).child_type = "api.googleapis.com/Config"];

  // other standard pagination fields...
}
```
## Rationale

### Support for Standard List

While Singleton resources are not directly part of a collection themselves, they
can be viewed as part of their parent's collection. The one-to-one relationship
of parent-to-singleton means that for every one parent there is one singleton
instance, naturally enabling some collection-based methods when combined with
the pattern of [Reading Across Collections][aip-159]. The Singleton can present
as a collection to the API consumer as it is indirectly one based on its parent.
Furthermore, presenting the Singleton resource as a pseudo-collection in such
methods enables future expansion to a real collection, should a Singleton be
found lacking.

### Including `plural` definition

While a Singleton is by definition singular, there are certain cases where
a Singleton resource may appear in a plural form e.g., if the service supports
Standard List (as defined here). As such, it is better to forward declare the
plural form of the Singleton resource type than to not have it when needed.

## Changelog

- **2024-04-15:** Singletons must specify `singular` and `plural` in resource.
- **2023-08-10:** Add Standard `List` support.
- **2023-07-26:** Clarified that read-only singletons should not have `Update`.
- **2021-11-02:** Added an example message and state parent eligibility.
- **2021-01-14:** Changed example from `settings` to `config` for clarity.

[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-133]: ./0133.md
[aip-134]: ./0134.md
[aip-135]: ./0135.md
[aip-159]: ./0159.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md#output-only
