---
id: 157
state: approved
created: 2019-01-26
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 50
---

# Partial responses

Sometimes, a resource can be either large or expensive to compute, and the API
needs to give the user control over which fields it sends back.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support partial responses in one of the three ways:

### Field masks parameter

Field masks (`google.protobuf.FieldMask`) can be used for granting the user
fine-grained control over what fields are returned. It is generally the
recommended way for an API to support partial responses.

To enable field masks, an API **should** support the masks as a [system parameter][0].
This parameter can be specified either using an HTTP query
parameter or an HTTP header (or a [gRPC metadata entry][1]).

- The value of the field mask parameter **must** be a `google.protobuf.FieldMask`.
- The field mask parameter **should** be specified using `$field` as a query parameter or `X-Goog-FieldMask` as an HTTP header.
- The field mask parameter **must** be optional:
  - An explicit value of `"*"` **should** be supported, and **must** return all
    fields.
  - If the field mask parameter is not provided, all fields **must** be
    returned.
- An API **may** allow read masks with non-terminal repeated fields (unlike
  update masks), but is not obligated to do so.

### View enumeration

Alternatively, an API **may** support partial responses with view enums.
View enums are useful for situations where an API only wants to expose a small
number of permutations to the user:

```proto
enum BookView {
  // The default / unset value.
  // The API will default to the BASIC view.
  BOOK_VIEW_UNSPECIFIED = 0;

  // Include basic metadata about the book, but not the full contents.
  // This is the default value (for both ListBooks and GetBook).
  BASIC = 1;

  // Include everything.
  FULL = 2;
}
```

- The enum **should** be specified as a `view` field on the request message.
- The enum **should** be named something ending in `-View`
- The enum **should** at minimum have values named `BASIC` and `FULL` (although
  it **may** have values other than these).
- The `UNSPECIFIED` value **must** be valid (not an error), and the API
  **must** document what the unspecified value will do).
  - For List RPCs, the effective default value **should** be `BASIC`.
  - For Get RPCs, the effective default value **should** be either `BASIC` or
    `FULL`.
- The enum **should** be defined at the top level of the proto file (as it is
  likely to be needed in multiple requests, e.g. both `Get` and `List`).
- APIs **may** add fields to a given view over time. APIs **must not** remove a
  field from a given view (this is a breaking change).

  **Note:** If a service requires (or might require) multiple views with
  overlapping but distinct values, there is a potential for a namespace
  conflict. In this situation, the service **should** nest the view enum within
  the individual resource.

### Read masks as a request field

Similar to a system parameter, an API **may** support read masks as a single field on the request
message: `google.protobuf.FieldMask read_mask`.

- The read mask **must** be a `google.protobuf.FieldMask` and **should** be
  named `read_mask`.
- The field mask **should** be optional:
  - An explicit value of `"*"` **should** be supported, and **must** return all
    fields.
  - If the field mask parameter is not provided, all fields **must** be
    returned.
- An API **may** allow read masks with non-terminal repeated fields (unlike
  update masks), but is not obligated to do so.

## Changelog

- **2021-03-04:** Added guidance for conflicting view enums.
- **2021-10-06:** Updated the guidance with system parameters

[0]: https://cloud.google.com/apis/docs/system-parameters
[1]: https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/#metadata
