---
id: 159
state: approved
created: 2019-07-26
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 70
---

# Reading across collections

Sometimes, it is useful for a user to be able to retrieve resources across
multiple collections, or retrieve a single resource without needing to know
what collection it is in.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support reading resources across multiple collections by allowing
users to specify a `-` (the hyphen or dash character) as a wildcard character
in a standard [`List`][aip-132] method:

```
GET /v1/publishers/-/books?filter=...
```

- The URL pattern **must** still be specified with `*` and permit the
  collection to be specified; a URL pattern **must not** hard-code the `-`
  character.
- The method **must** explicitly document that this behavior is supported.
- The resources provided in the response **must** use the canonical name of the
  resource, with the actual parent collection identifiers (instead of `-`).
- Services **may** support reading across collections on `List` requests
  regardless of whether the identifiers of the child resources are guaranteed
  to be unique. However, services **must not** support reading across
  collections on `Get` requests if the child resources might have a collision.
- Cross-parent requests **should not** support `order_by`. If they do, the
  field **must** document that it is best effort. This is because cross-parent
  requests introduce ambiguity around ordering, especially if there is
  difficulty reaching a parent (see [AIP-217][]).

**Important:** If listing across multiple collections introduces the
possibility of partial failures due to unreachable parents (such as when
listing across locations), the method **must** indicate this following the
guidance in [AIP-217][].

### Unique resource lookup

Sometimes, a resource within a sub-collection has an identifier that is unique
across parent collections. In this case, it may be useful to allow a
[`Get`][aip-131] method to retrieve that resource without knowing which parent
collection contains it. In such cases, APIs **may** allow users to specify the
wildcard collection ID `-` (the hyphen or dash character) to represent any
parent collection:

```
GET https://example.googleapis.com/v1/publishers/-/books/{book}
```

- The URL pattern **must** still be specified with `*` and permit the
  collection to be specified; a URL pattern **must not** hard-code the `-`
  character.
- The method **must** explicitly document that this behavior is supported.
- The resource name in the response **must** use the canonical name of the
  resource, with actual parent collection identifiers (instead of `-`). For
  example, the request above returns a resource with a name like
  `publishers/123/books/456`, _not_ `publishers/-/books/456`.
- The resource ID **must** be unique within parent collections.

## Further reading

- For partial failures due to unreachable resources, see [AIP-217][].

[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-217]: ./0217.md

## Changelog

- **2019-08-26**: Added a reference to guidance for unreachable resources.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
