---
id: 160
state: approved
created: 2020-02-24
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 80
---

# Filtering

Often, when listing resources (using a list method as defined in [AIP-132][] or
something reasonably similar), it is desirable to filter over the collection
and only return results that the user is interested in.

It is tempting to define a structure to handle the precise filtering needs for
each API. However, filtering requirements evolve frequently, and therefore it
is prudent to use a string field with a structured syntax accessible to a
non-technical audience. This allows updates to be able to be made
transparently, without waiting for UI or client updates.

**Note:** Because list filters are intended for a potentially non-technical
audience, they sometimes borrow from patterns of colloquial speech rather than
common patterns found in code.

## Guidance

APIs **may** provide filtering to users on `List` methods (or similar methods
to query a collection, such as `Search`). If they choose to do so, they
**should** follow the common specification for filters discussed here. The
syntax is formally defined in the [EBNF grammar][].

When employing filtering, a request message **should** have exactly one
filtering field, `string filter`. Filtering of related objects is handled
through [traversal](#traversal-operator) or [functions](#functions).

**Note:** List Filters have fuzzy matching characteristics with support for
result ranking and scoring. For developers interested in deterministic
evaluation of list filters, see [CEL][].

### Literals

A bare literal value (examples: "42", "Hugo") is a value to be matched against.
Literals appearing alone (with no specified field) **should** usually be
matched anywhere it may appear in an object's field values.

However, a service **may** choose to only consider certain fields; if so, it
**must** document which fields it considers. A service **may** include new
fields over time, but **should** do so judiciously and consider impact on
existing users.

**Note:** Literals separated by whitespace are considered to have a fuzzy
variant of `AND`. Therefore, `Victor Hugo` is roughly equivalent to
`Victor AND Hugo`.

### Logical Operators

Filtering implementations **should** provide the binary operators:

| Operator | Example       | Meaning                                |
| -------- | ------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `AND`    | `a AND b`     | True if `a` and `b` are true.          |
| `OR`     | `a OR b OR c` | True if any of `a`, `b`, `c` are true. |

**Note:** To match common patterns of speech, the `OR` operator has higher
precedence than `AND`, unlike what is found in most programming languages. The
expression `a AND b OR c` evaluates: `a AND (b OR c)`. API documentation and
examples **should** encourage the use of explicit parentheses to avoid
confusion, but **should not** require explicit parentheses.

### Negation Operators

Filtering implementations **should** provide the unary operators `NOT` and `-`.
These are used interchangeably, and a service that supports negation **must**
support both formats.

| Operator | Example | Meaning                  |
| -------- | ------- | ------------------------ |
| `NOT`    | `NOT a` | True if `a` is not true. |
| `-`      | `-a`    | True if `a` is not true. |

### Comparison Operators

Filtering implementations **should** provide the binary comparison operators
`=`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, and `>=` for string, numeric, timestamp, and
duration fields (but **should not** provide them for booleans or enums).

| Operator | Example      | Meaning                                         |
| -------- | ------------ | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `=`      | `a = true`   | True if `a` is true.                            |
| `!=`     | `a != 42`    | True unless `a` equals 42.                      |
| `<`      | `a < 42`     | True if `a` is a numeric value below 42.        |
| `>`      | `a > "foo"`  | True if `a` is lexically ordered after "foo".   |
| `<=`     | `a <= "foo"` | True if `a` is "foo" or lexically before it.    |
| `>=`     | `a >= 42`    | True if `a` is a numeric value of 42 or higher. |

**Note:** Unlike in most programming languages, field names **must** appear on
the left-hand side of a comparison operator; the right-hand side only accepts
literals and logical operators.

Because filters are accepted as query strings, type conversion takes place to
translate the string to the appropriate strongly-typed value:

- Enums expect the enum's string representation (case-sensitive).
- Booleans expect `true` and `false` literal values.
- Numbers expect the standard integer or float representations. For floats,
  exponents are supported (e.g. `2.997e9`).
- [Durations][] expect a numeric representation followed by an `s` suffix (for
  seconds). Examples: `20s`, `1.2s`.
- [Timestamps][] expect an [RFC-3339][] formatted string (e.g.
  `2012-04-21T11:30:00-04:00`). UTC offsets are supported.

**Warning:** The identifiers `true`, `false`, and `null` only carry intrinsic
meaning when used in the context of a typed field reference.

Additionally, when comparing strings for equality, services **should** support
wildcards using the `*` character; for example, `a = "*.foo"` is true if `a`
_ends with_ ".foo".

### Traversal operator

Filtering implementations **should** provide the `.` operator, which indicates
traversal through a message, map, or struct.

| Example         | Meaning                                               |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `a.b = true`    | True if `a` has a boolean `b` field that is true.     |
| `a.b > 42`      | True if `a` has a numeric `b` field that is above 42. |
| `a.b.c = "foo"` | True if `a.b` has a string `c` field that is "foo".   |

Traversal **must** be written using the field names from the resource. If a
service wishes to support "implicit fields" of some kind, they **must** do so
through well-documented [functions](#functions). A service **may** specify a
subset of fields that are supported for traversal.

If a user attempts to traverse to a field that is not defined on the message,
the service **should** return an error with `INVALID_ARGUMENT`. A service
**may** permit traversal to undefined keys on maps and structs, and **should**
document how it behaves in this situation.

**Important:** The `.` operator **must not** be used to traverse through a
repeated field or list, except for specific use with the `:` operator.

### Has Operator

Filtering implementations **must** provide the `:` operator, which means "has".
It is usable with collections (repeated fields or maps) as well as messages,
and behaves slightly differently in each case.

Repeated fields query to see if the repeated structure contains a matching
element:

| Example    | Meaning                                                     |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| `r:42`     | True if `r` contains 42.                                    |
| `r.foo:42` | True if `r` contains an element `e` such that `e.foo = 42`. |

**Important:** Filters can not query a _specific_ element on a repeated field
for a value. For example, `e.0.foo = 42` and `e[0].foo = 42` are **not** valid
filters.

Maps, structs, messages can query either for the presence of a field in the map
or a specific value:

| Example    | Meaning                             |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `m:foo`    | True if `m` contains the key "foo". |
| `m.foo:*`  | True if `m` contains the key "foo". |
| `m.foo:42` | True if `m.foo` is 42.              |

There are two slight distinctions when parsing messages:

- When traversing messages, a field is only considered to be present if it has
  a non-default value.
- When traversing messages, field names are snake case, although
  implementations **may** choose to support automatic conversion between camel
  case and snake case.

### Functions

The filtering language supports a function call syntax in order to support
API-specific extensions. An API **may** define a function using the
`call(arg...)` syntax, and **must** document any specific functions it
supports.

### Limitations

A service **may** specify further structure or limitations for filter queries,
above what is defined here. For example, a service may support the logical
operators but only permit a certain number of them (to avoid "queries of death"
or other performance concerns).

Further structure or limitations **must** be clearly documented, **must not**
violate requirements set forth in this document, and a non-compliant filter
query **must** error with `INVALID_ARGUMENT`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[cel]: https://github.com/google/cel-spec
[cel-cpp]: https://github.com/google/cel-cpp
[cel-go]: https://github.com/google/cel-go
[durations]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/duration.proto
[ebnf grammar]: /assets/misc/ebnf-filtering.txt
[rfc-3339]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339
[timestamps]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/timestamp.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
