---
id: 161
state: approved
created: 2021-03-01
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 85
---

# Field masks

Often, when updating resources (using an update method as defined in AIP-134 or
something reasonably similar), it is desirable to specify exactly which fields
are being updated, so that the service can ignore the rest, even if the user
sends new values.

It is tempting to define a mask format to handle the precise needs for each
API. However, masking requirements evolve, and therefore it is prudent to use a
structured syntax. This allows updates to be able to be made transparently,
without waiting for UI or client updates.

## Guidance

These masks of field names are called "field masks". Fields representing a field
mask **must** use the `google.protobuf.FieldMask` type. Field masks are most
common on Update requests (AIP-134).

Field masks **must** always be relative to the resource:

**Warning:** Read masks as a single field on the request message, for
example: `google.protobuf.FieldMask read_mask` are **DEPRECATED**.

```proto
message UpdateBookRequest {
  // The book to update.
  //
  // The book's `name` field is used to identify the book to update.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  Book book = 1 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // The list of fields to update.
  // Fields are specified relative to the book
  // (e.g. `title`, `rating`; *not* `book.title` or `book.rating`).
  google.protobuf.FieldMask update_mask = 2;
}
```

### Read-write consistency

Read and write behavior for field masks **must** be self-consistent if a mask
is present:

- If a user updates a resource with a given mask, and then reads the same
  resource with the same mask, the exact same data **must** be returned.
  - Exception: [Output only fields](#output-only-fields).
- Similarly, reading a resource with a given mask and then updating the
  resource with the returned data and the same mask **must** be a no-op.

**Note:** This implies that any mask that is valid for either read or write
**must** be valid for both.

### Specifying specific fields

Field masks **must** permit the specification of specific fields in a defined
struct, using the `.` character for traversal.

Because field masks are always relative to the resource, direct fields on the
resource require no traversal (examples: `title`, `rating`). Traversal is used
when resources contain messages (example: `author.given_name`).

**Note:** A user **must** be able to specify either a field as a whole, or one
of its subfields: `author` and `author.given_name` are both valid.

### Map fields

Field masks **may** permit the specification of specific fields in a map, if
and only if the map's keys are either strings or integers, using the `.`
character for traversal.

Field masks **should** support string keys that contain characters that are
problematic for the field mask syntax, using the backtick character.

```proto
message Book {
  // The name of the book.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1;

  // Reviews for the back cover. The key is the author of the review,
  // and the value is the text of the review.
  //
  // Valid field masks: reviews, reviews.smith, reviews.`John Smith`
  map<string, string> reviews = 2;
}
```

### Wildcards

Field masks **may** permit the use of the `*` character on a repeated field or
map to indicate the specification of particular sub-fields in the collection:

```proto
message Book {
  // The name of the book.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1;

  // The author or authors of the book.
  // Valid field masks: authors, authors.*.given_name, authors.*.family_name
  // Invalid field masks: authors.0, authors.0.given_name
  repeated Author authors = 2;
}

message Author {
  // The author's given name.
  string given_name = 1;

  // The author's family name.
  string family_name = 2;
}
```

**Note:** Field masks **must not** permit accessing a particular element of a
repeated field by index, and **must** return an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error if
this is attempted.

### Output only fields

If a user includes an output only field in an update mask indirectly (by using
a wildcard or specifying an overall message that includes an output-only
subfield), the service **must** ignore any output only fields provided as
input, even if they are cleared or modified.

If a user directly specifies an output only field in an update mask, the
service **should** ignore the output only fields provided as input, even if
they are cleared or modified, to permit the same field mask to be used for
input and output. However, the service **may** choose to error with
`INVALID_ARGUMENT` if the field is modified in input.

### Invalid field mask entries

When reading data, field masks **may** ignore entries that point to a value
that can not exist (either a field that does not exist, or a map key that the
service considers invalid).

When writing data, field masks **should** return an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error if
an entry points to a value that can not exist; however, the service **may**
permit deletions.
