---
id: 164
state: approved
created: 2020-10-06
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 95
---

# Soft delete

There are several reasons why a client could desire soft delete and undelete
functionality, but one over-arching reason stands out: recovery from mistakes.
A service that supports undelete makes it possible for users to recover
resources that were deleted by accident.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support the ability to "undelete", to allow for situations where
users mistakenly delete resources and need the ability to recover.

If a resource needs to support undelete, the `Delete` method **must** simply
mark the resource as having been deleted, but not completely remove it from the
system. If the method behaves this way, it **should** return the updated
resource instead of `google.protobuf.Empty`.

Resources that support soft delete **should** have both a `delete_time` and
`purge_time` field as described in AIP-148. Additionally, resources **should**
include a `DELETED` state value if the resource includes a `state` field
(AIP-216).

### Undelete

A resource that supports soft delete **should** provide an `Undelete` method:

```proto
rpc UndeleteBook(UndeleteBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:undelete"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`.
- The `body` clause **must** be `"*"`.
- The response message **must** be the resource itself. There is no
  `UndeleteBookResponse`.
  - The response **should** include the fully-populated resource unless it is
    infeasible to do so.
  - If the undelete RPC is [long-running](#long-running-undelete), the response
    message **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` which resolves to the
    resource itself.

### Undelete request message

Undelete methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message UndeleteBookRequest {
  // The name of the deleted book.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference).type = "library.googleapis.com/Book"];
}
```

- A `name` field **must** be included. It **should** be called `name`.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] that it
    references.
  - The comment for the field **should** document the resource pattern.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.

### Long-running undelete

Some resources take longer to undelete a resource than is reasonable for a
regular API request. In this situation, the API **should** use a long-running
operation (AIP-151) instead:

```proto
rpc UndeleteBook(UndeleteBookRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:undelete"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "Book"
    metadata_type: "OperationMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The response type **must** be set to the resource (what the return type would
  be if the RPC was not long-running).
- Both the `response_type` and `metadata_type` fields **must** be specified.

### List and Get

Soft-deleted resources **should not** be returned in `List` (AIP-132) responses
by default (unless `bool show_deleted` is true). `Get` (AIP-131) requests for
soft-deleted resources **should** return the resource (rather than a
`NOT_FOUND` error).

APIs that soft delete resources **may** choose a reasonable strategy for
purging those resources, including automatic purging after a reasonable time
(such as 30 days), allowing users to set an expiry time (AIP-214), or retaining
the resources indefinitely. Regardless of what strategy is selected, the API
**should** document when soft deleted resources will be completely removed.

### Declarative-friendly resources

Soft-deletable resources have a poorer experience than hard-deleted resources in
declarative clients: since an ID on a soft-deleted resource is not re-usable
unless a custom method (undelete) is called, an imperative client must be
introduced or hand-written code is required to incorporate the usage of the
custom method.

### Errors

If the user does not have permission to access the resource, regardless of
whether or not it exists, the service **must** error with `PERMISSION_DENIED`
(HTTP 403). Permission **must** be checked prior to checking if the resource
exists.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested resource does not
exist (either it was never created or already expunged), the service **must**
error with `NOT_FOUND` (HTTP 404).

If the user calling a soft `Delete` has proper permission, but the requested
resource is already deleted, the service **must** succeed if `allow_missing` is
`true`, and **should** error with `NOT_FOUND` (HTTP 404) if `allow_missing` is
`false`.

If the user calling `Undelete` has proper permission, but the requested
resource is not deleted, the service **must** respond with `ALREADY_EXISTS`
(HTTP 409).

## Further reading

- For the `Delete` standard method, see AIP-135.
- For long-running operations, see AIP-151.
- For resource freshness validation (`etag`), see AIP-154.
- For change validation (`validate_only`), see AIP-163.

## Changelog

- **2024-09-24**: Included missing requirement for `delete_time`.
- **2023-07-13**: Renamed overloaded `expire_time` to `purge_time`.
- **2021-07-12**: Added error behavior when soft deleting a deleted resource.
- **2021-07-12**: Clarified that `ALREADY_EXISTS` errors apply to `Undelete`.
- **2021-07-12**: Changed the `expire_time` field to "should" for consistency
  with AIP-148.
- **2020-09-23**: Soft delete material in AIP-135 migrated to this AIP.

[aip-123]: ./0123.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
