---
id: 165
state: approved
created: 2019-12-18
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 100
---

# Criteria-based delete

Occasionally, an API may need to provide a mechanism to delete a large number
of resources based on some set of filter parameters, rather than requiring the
individual resource name of the resources to be deleted.

This is a rare case, reserved for situations where users need to delete
thousands or more resources at once, in which case the normal Batch Delete
pattern ([AIP-235][]) becomes unwieldy and inconvenient.

## Guidance

**Important:** Most APIs **should** use only Delete ([AIP-135][]) or Batch
Delete ([AIP-235][]) for deleting resources, and **should not** implement
deleting based on criteria. This is because deleting is generally irreversible
and this type of operation makes it easy for a user to accidentally lose
significant amounts of data.

An API **may** implement a Purge method to permit deleting a large number of
resources based on a filter string; however, this **should** only be done if
the Batch Delete ([AIP-235][]) pattern is insufficient to accomplish the
desired goal:

```proto
rpc PurgeBooks(PurgeBooksRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:purge"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PurgeBooksResponse"
    metadata_type: "PurgeBooksMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with the word `Purge`. The remainder of the
  RPC name **should** be the plural form of the resource being purged.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The response type **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` (see
  AIP-151) that resolves to a message whose name matches the RPC name, with
  a `Response` suffix.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`, and the `body` **must** be `"*"`.
- The URI path **should** represent the collection for the resource.
- The `parent` field **should** be included in the URI. If the API wishes to
  support deletion across multiple parents, it **should** accept the `-`
  character consistent with [AIP-159][].

### Request message

Purge methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message PurgeBooksRequest {
  // The publisher to purge books from.
  // To purge books across publishers, send "publishers/-".
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // A filter matching the books to be purged.
  string filter = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // Actually perform the purge.
  // If `force` is set to false, the method will return a sample of
  // resource names that would be deleted.
  bool force = 3;
}
```

- A singular `string parent` field **should** be included, unless the resource
  is top-level.
  - The field **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] that it
    references.
- A singular `string filter` field **must** be included and **must** follow the
  same semantics as in List methods (AIP-160).
  - It **should** be [annotated as required][aip-203].
- A singular `bool force` field **must** be included. If it is not set, the API
  **must** return a count of the resources that would be deleted as well as a
  sample of those resources, without actually performing the deletion.

### Response message

Purge methods implement a common response message pattern:

```proto
message PurgeBooksResponse {
  // The number of books that this request deleted (or, if `force` is false,
  // the number of books that will be deleted).
  int32 purge_count = 1;

  // A sample of the resource names of books that will be deleted.
  // Only populated if `force` is set to false.
  repeated string purge_sample = 2 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
  }];
}
```

- A singular `int32 purge_count` field **should** be included, and provide the
  number of resources that were deleted (or would be deleted). This count
  **may** be an estimate similar to `total_size` in AIP-158 (but the service
  **should** document this if so).
- A `repeated string purge_sample` field **should** be included: If `force` is
  `false`, it **should** provide a sample of resource names that will be
  deleted. If `force` is true, this field **should not** be populated.
  - The sample **should** be a sufficient size to catch clearly obvious
    mistakes: A good rule of thumb is 100. The API **should** document the
    size, and **should** document that it is a maximum (it is possible to send
    fewer).
  - The sample **may** be random or **may** be deterministic (such as the first
    matched resource names). The API **should** document which approach is
    used.
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-123] that it
    references.

**Note:** Even if `purge_count` and `purge_sample` are not included, the
`force` field **must** still be included in the request.

## Changelog

- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2020-10-29**: Expanded guidance on HTTP, field behavior, and resource
  reference annotations.

[aip-123]: ./0123.md
[aip-135]: ./0135.md
[aip-159]: ./0159.md
[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[aip-235]: ./0235.md
