---
id: 181
state: approved
created: 2019-02-18
placement:
  category: compatibility
  order: 20
---

# Stability levels

While different organizations (both inside Google and outside) have different
product life cycles, AIPs refer to the _stability_ of an API component using
the following terms.

**Note:** These stability levels roughly correspond to the product launch
stages (alpha, beta, GA) in Google Cloud, but are not identical. GCP imposes
its own additional expectations and commitments on top of what is outlined
here.

## Alpha

An _alpha_ component undergoes rapid iteration with a known set of users who
**must** be tolerant of change. The number of users **should** be a
whitelisted, manageable set, such that it is feasible to communicate with all
of them individually.

Breaking changes **must** be both allowed and expected in alpha components, and
users **must** have no expectation of stability.

## Beta

A _beta_ component **must** be considered complete and ready to be declared
stable, subject to public testing. Beta components **should** be exposed to an
unknown and potentially large set of users. In other words, beta components
**should not** be behind a whitelist; instead, they **should** be available to
the public.

Because users of beta components tend to have a lower tolerance of change, beta
components **should** be as stable as possible; however, the beta component
**must** be permitted to change over time. These changes **should** be minimal
but **may** include backwards-incompatible changes to beta components.
Backwards-incompatible changes **must** be made only after a reasonable
deprecation period to provide users with an opportunity to migrate their code.
This deprecation period **must** be defined at the time of being marked beta.

Beta components **should** be time-boxed and promoted to stable if no issues
are found in the specified timeframe, which **should** be specified at the time
of being marked beta. A reasonable time period **may** vary, but a good rule of
thumb is 90 days.

## Stable

A _stable_ component **must** be fully-supported over the lifetime of the major
API version. Because users expect such stability from components marked stable,
there **must** be no breaking changes to these components, subject to the
caveats described below.

### Major versions

When breaking changes become necessary, the API producer **should** create the
next major version of the API, and start a deprecation clock on the existing
version.

Turn-down of any version containing stable components **must** have a formal
process defined at the time of being marked stable. This process **must**
specify a deprecation period for users which provides them with reasonable
advance warning.

### Isolated changes

On very rare occasions, it could be preferable to make a small, isolated
breaking change, if this will only cause inconvenience to a small subset of
users. (Creating a new major version is an inconvenience to all users.) In this
case, the API producer **may** deprecate the component, but **must** continue
to support the component for the normal turndown period for a stable component.

**Important:** Making an in-place breaking change in a stable API is considered
an extreme course of action, and should be treated with equal or greater
gravity as creating a new major version. For example, at Google, this requires
the approval of the API Governance team.

### Emergency changes

In certain exceptional cases, such as security concerns or regulatory
requirements, any API component **may** be changed in a breaking manner
regardless of its stability level, and a deprecation is not promised in these
situations.
