---
id: 182
state: reviewing
created: 2021-08-13
placement:
  category: compatibility
  order: 30
---

# External software dependencies

Some services have a particular type of dependency on external software: they
allow users to create resources that run on or expose the external software in
some way. For example:

- A database admin service can allow users to create databases running on a
  particular version of a particular database engine (for example, PostgreSQL
  13.4).
- A virtual machine service can allow users to create VMs running a particular
  operating system (for example, Ubuntu 20.04).
- An application or function platform service can allow users to write code
  that runs against a particular version of a programming language (for
  example, Node.js 16.6).

Services that provide external software to users in this way will eventually
need to address the fact that all of these types of software have release
lifecycles, and the versions they currently expose will eventually reach
end-of-life.

## Guidance

Services that expose external software dependencies **should** allow users to
create resources using any LTS (long-term support) version of the supported
software, and **may** allow users to create resources using non-LTS versions.

Services **should not** indefinitely allow users to create new resources using
versions that have reached end-of-life, although they **may** have a transition
period between when the software version reaches end-of-life and when support
for creating new resources with that version is removed.

**Note:** Restricting or removing the ability to create resources using
end-of-life versions of software is **not** considered a breaking change for
the service for the purpose of AIP-181, even though it actually is one.
However, because the change can break existing users' workflows, services
**must** notify users who are using resources approaching end-of-life.

If possible, services **should** allow previously-created resources to remain,
and **may** warn users of the risks associated with continuing to use
end-of-life software. Services **should not** proactively remove resources
using end-of-life software.

### Continued support

If supporting a version that has reached end-of-life is necessary for business
reasons (usually because the end-of-life software still has significant
adoption), the service **may** choose to officially support the end-of-life
version, but **must** take on the responsibility of patching and maintaining
the software if it does so.
