---
id: 185
state: approved
created: 2024-10-22
placement:
  category: compatibility
  order: 40
---

# API Versioning

This topic describes the versioning strategies used by Google APIs. In
general, these strategies apply to all Google-managed services.

## Guidance

All Google API interfaces **must** provide a _major version number_, which is
encoded at the end of the protobuf package, and included as the first part of
the URI path for REST APIs. In the event an API needs to make an incompatible
change, consult [AIP-180][] and [AIP-181][] for necessary steps based on the
stability level of the surface in question.

Note: The use of the term "major version number" above is taken from
[semantic versioning][]. However, unlike in traditional semantic versioning,
Google APIs **must not** expose minor or patch version numbers. For
example, Google APIs use `v1`, not `v1.0`, `v1.1`, or `v1.4.2`. From a user's
perspective, major versions are updated in place, and users receive new
functionality without migration.

A new major version of an API **must not** depend on a previous major version of
the same API. An API surface **must not** depend on other APIs, except for in
the cases outlined in [AIP-213][] and [AIP-215][].

Different versions of the same API **must** be able to work at the same time
within a single client application for a reasonable transition period. This time
period allows the client to transition smoothly to the newer version. An older
version **must** go through a reasonable, well-communicated deprecation period
before being shut down.

For releases which have [alpha or beta stability][AIP-181], APIs **must** append
the stability level after the major version number in the protobuf package and
URI path using one of these strategies:

- Channel-based versioning (recommended)
- Release-based versioning
- Visibility-based versioning

### Channel-based versioning

A *stability channel* is a long-lived release at a given stability level that
receives in-place updates. There is no more than one channel per stability level
for a major version. Under this strategy, there are up to three channels
available: alpha, beta, and stable.

The alpha and beta channel **must** have their stability level appended to the
version, but the stable channel **must not** have the stability level appended.
For example, `v1` is an acceptable version for the stable channel, but `v1beta`
or `v1alpha` are not. Similarly, `v1beta` or `v1alpha` are acceptable versions
for the respective beta and alpha channel, but `v1` is not acceptable for
either. Each of these channels receives new features and updates "in-place".

The beta channel's functionality **must** be a superset of the stable channel's
functionality, and the alpha channel's functionality **must** be a superset of
the beta channel's functionality.

#### Deprecating API functionality

API elements (fields, messages, RPCs) **may** be marked deprecated in any
channel to indicate that they should no longer be used:

```proto
// Represents a scroll. Books are preferred over scrolls.
message Scroll {
  option deprecated = true;

  // ...
}
```

Deprecated API functionality **must not** graduate from alpha to beta, nor beta
to stable. In other words, functionality **must not** arrive "pre-deprecated"
in any channel.

The beta channel's functionality **may** be removed after it has been deprecated
for a sufficient period; we recommend 180 days. For functionality that exists
only in the alpha channel, deprecation is optional, and functionality **may** be
removed without notice. If functionality is deprecated in an API's
alpha channel before removal, the API **should** apply the same annotation, and
**may** use any timeframe it wishes.

### Release-based versioning

**Important:** This pattern is not commonly used for new services. There are
existing services that follow it, but Channel-based Versioning is the preferred
mechanism.

An *individual release* is an alpha or beta release that is expected to be
available for a limited time period before its functionality is incorporated
into the stable channel, after which the individual release will be shut down.
When using release-based versioning strategy, an API may have any number of
individual releases at each stability level.

Note: Both the channel-based and release-based strategies update the _stable_
version in-place. There is a single stable channel, rather than individual
stable releases, even when using the release-based strategy.

Alpha and beta releases **must** have their stability level appended to the
version, followed by an incrementing release number. For example, `v1beta1` or
`v1alpha5`. APIs **should** document the chronological order of these versions
in their documentation (such as comments).

Each alpha or beta release **may** be updated in place with backwards-compatible
changes. For beta releases, backwards-incompatible updates **should** be made by
incrementing the release number and publishing a new release with the change.
For example, if the current version is `v1beta1`, then `v1beta2` is released
next.

Alpha and beta releases **should** be shut down after their functionality
reaches the stable channel. An alpha release **may** be shut down at any time,
while a beta release **should** allow users a reasonable transition period; we
recommend 180 days.

### Visibility-based versioning

[API visibility][] is an advanced feature provided by Google API infrastructure.
It allows API producers to expose multiple external API views from one internal
API surface, and each view is associated with an API _visibility label_, such
as:

```proto
import "google/api/visibility.proto";

message Resource {
  string name = 1;

  // Preview. Do not use this feature for production.
  string display_name = 2
    [(google.api.field_visibility).restriction = "PREVIEW"];
}
```

A visibility label is a case-sensitive string that can be used to tag any API
element. By convention, visibility labels should always use UPPER case.
An implicit `PUBLIC` label is applied to all API elements unless an explicit
visibility label is applied as in the example above.

Each visibility label is an allow-list. API producers need to grant visibility
labels to API consumers for them to use API features associated with the labels.
In other words, an API visibility label is like an ACL'ed API version.

Multiple visibility labels **may** be applied to an element by using a
comma-separated string (e.g. `"PREVIEW,TRUSTED_TESTER"`). When multiple
visibility labels are used, then the client needs only _one_ of the visibility
labels (logical `OR`).

By default, the visibility labels granted to the API consumer are used to verify
incoming requests. However, a client can send requests with an explicit
visibility label as follows:

```
GET /v1/projects/my-project/topics HTTP/1.1
Host: pubsub.googleapis.com
Authorization: Bearer y29....
X-Goog-Visibilities: PREVIEW
```

A single API request can specify at most one visibility label.

API producers can use API visibility for API versioning, such as
`INTERNAL` and `PREVIEW`. A new API feature starts with the `INTERNAL` label,
then moves to the `PREVIEW` label. When the feature is stable and becomes
generally available, all API visibility labels are removed from the API
definition.

In general, API visibility is easier to implement than API versioning for
incremental changes, but it depends on sophisticated API infrastructure support.
Google Cloud APIs often use API visibility for Preview features.

[AIP-180]: https://aip.dev/180
[AIP-181]: https://aip.dev/181
[AIP-213]: https://aip.dev/213
[AIP-215]: https://aip.dev/215
[api visibility]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/api/visibility.proto
[semantic versioning]: https://semver.org/
