---
id: 191
state: approved
created: 2019-07-25
placement:
  category: polish
  order: 10
---

# File and directory structure

A consistent file and directory structure, while making minimal difference
technically, makes API surface definitions easier for users and reviewers to
read.

## Guidance

**Note:** The following guidance applies to APIs defined in protocol buffers,
such as those used throughout Google. While the spirit of this guidance applies
to APIs defined using other specification languages or formats, some of the
particular recommendations might be irrelevant.

### Syntax

APIs defined in protocol buffers **must** use `proto3` syntax.

### Single package

APIs defined in protocol buffers **must** define each individual API in a
single package, which **must** end in a version component. For example:

```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package google.cloud.translation.v3;
```

Google APIs **must** reside in a directory that matches the protocol buffer
`package` directive. For example, the package above dictates that the directory
be `google/cloud/translation/v3`.

### File names

It is often useful to divide API definitions into multiple files. File names
**must** use `snake_case`.

APIs **should** have an obvious "entry" file, generally named after the API
itself. An API with a small number of discrete services (Google Cloud Pub/Sub's
`Publisher` and `Subscriber` is a good example) **may** have a separate entry
file per service.

APIs with only one file **should** use a filename corresponding to the name of
the API.

API `service` definitions and associated RPC request and response `message`
definitions **should** be defined in the same file.

Bear in mind that the file names often become module names in client libraries,
and customers use them in `import` or `use` statements. Therefore, choosing a
descriptive and language keyword-free filename does matter. For example, a file
called `import.proto` may be problematic in Python.

**Note:** The version **must not** be used as a filename, because this creates
bizarre imports in client libraries. Filenames such as `v3.proto` or
`v1beta1.proto` are prohibited.

### File layout

Individual files **should** place higher level and more important definitions
before lower level and less important definitions.

In a proto file, components **should** be in the following order, and each of
these **should** be separated by a blank line:

- Copyright and license notice (if applicable).
- The proto `syntax` statement.
- The proto `package` statement.
- Any `import` statements, in alphabetical order.
- Any file-level `option` statements.
- Any `service` definitions.
  - Methods **should** be grouped by the resource they impact, and standard
    methods **should** precede custom methods.
- Resource `message` definitions. A parent resource **must** be defined before
  its child resources.
- The RPC request and response `message` definitions, in the same order of the
  corresponding methods. Each request message **must** precede its
  corresponding response message (if any).
- Any remaining `message` definitions.
- Any top-level `enum` definitions.

### Packaging annotations

Protocol buffers ships with annotations to declare the package or namespace
(depending on the vocabulary of the target language) of the generated files.
For example, setting `go_package` or `csharp_namespace` will override the
inferred package name.

When defining APIs, the following rules apply:

- Java
  - The `java_package` annotation **must** be set. The correct value is usually
    the proto package with the appropriate TLD prefixed. Example:
    `com.google.example.v1`.
  - The `java_multiple_files` annotation **must** be set to `true`.
  - The `java_outer_classname` annotation **must** be set, and **should** be
    set to the name of the proto filename, in `PascalCase`, with `Proto`
    appended. Example: `LibraryProto`.
- Other languages
  - Package or namespace directives for other languages **must** be set either
    in every file in the proto package, or none of them. If they are set, the
    values **must** be identical in every file.
  - If any part of the protobuf package is a compound name (such as
    accessapproval), C#, Ruby and PHP options **must** be specified in order
    to take account of the word breaks using PascalCase (UpperCamelCase).
    Example:
    ```proto
    option csharp_namespace = "Google.Cloud.AccessApproval.V1";
    option php_namespace = "Google\\Cloud\\AccessApproval\\V1";
    option ruby_package = "Google::Cloud::AccessApproval::V1";
    ```
  - The `go_package` value depends directly on how the Go code is managed i.e.
    if the module name is based on the VCS provider or using a remote import
    path, but often has a consistent structure.
    - The module **may** differ based on product area e.g.
      `google.cloud.accessapproval.v1` would be in module
      `cloud.google.com/go/accessapproval`.
    - The package import path **should** be derived from the proto package.
    - An API version in the proto package **should** be prefixed with `api` e.g.
      the proto package segment `v1` becomes `apiv1`.
    - The terminal import path segment **should** be based on the product name
      found within the proto package and **must** be suffixed with `pb` e.g.
      `accessapproval` becomes `accessapprovalpb`.
    - This value **should** be left to the team owning the generated code to
      decide on.

All packaging annotations **should** be specified in alphabetical order of
name. Refer to the [Protobuf documentation][package docs] for more about
language package options.

**Important:** While languages other than Java have sensible defaults for APIs
which don't include compound names, be aware that _adding_ this annotation
(with a value not equivalent to the default) constitutes a breaking change in
that language. When releasing protos, be sure that omissions are intentional.

## Rationale

### Java packaging options

Set the option, `java_multiple_files`, to true to get a cleaner file structure.
Doing so instructs `protoc` to create one output file per Protobuf type, which
allows for more fine-grained imports. The option, `java_outer_classname`, is
required in combination with `java_multiple_files`. It instructs `protoc` to
wrap each compiled Protobuf type in a Java class whose name is the value of the
option. This prevents potential naming collisions between generated types.


### Go packaging option

The Go packaging option needs to be decided by the team that owns the generated
code, because it is directly tied to the source code management practices of the
team. Allowing every proto package to decide on their own Go package creates
inconsistencies and friction in management of the code. Within that owning team,
having a consistent structure in the Go package naming is critical to a 
consistent end user experience.

## Changelog

- **2024-06-13**: Added guidance for Go packaging annotation.
- **2024-06-05**: Added rationale for Java packaging options.
- **2023-02-24**: Added guidance on protobuf syntax.
- **2022-10-18**: Added guidance on Ruby/PHP/C# options.
- **2019-11-18**: Added guidance on the packaging annotations.

[package docs]: https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/#packages
