---
id: 193
state: draft
created: 2019-07-26
placement:
  category: polish
  order: 30
---

# Errors

Effective error communication is an important part of designing simple
and intuitive APIs. Services returning standardized error responses
enable API clients to construct centralized common error handling logic.
This common logic simplifies API client applications and eliminates the
need for cumbersome custom error handling code.

## Guidance

Services **must** return a [`google.rpc.Status`][Status] message when an
API error occurs, and **must** use the canonical error codes defined in
[`google.rpc.Code`][Code].  More information about the particular codes
is available in the [gRPC status code documentation][].

Error messages **should** help a reasonably technical user *understand*
and *resolve* the issue, and **should not** assume that the user is an
expert in your particular API. Additionally, error messages **must not**
assume that the user will know anything about its underlying
implementation.

Error messages **should** be brief but actionable. Any extra information
**should** be provided in the `details` field. If even more information
is necessary, you **should** provide a link where a reader can get more
information or ask questions to help resolve the issue. It is also
important to [set the right tone][writing-tone] when writing messages.

### Error Response

#### JSON representation

A JSON representation of an error response might look like the following
example.

For the purposes of following best practices, it’s helpful to break the
error response into sections. Note that the order in which you write the
error message is often different from how the error is presented to
users.


```json
{
  "error": {
    "code": 429,
    "message": "The zone 'us-east1-a' does not have enough resources available to fulfill the request. Try a different zone, or try again later.",
    "status": "RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED",
    "details": [
      {
        "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.ErrorInfo",
        "reason": "RESOURCE_AVAILABILITY",
        "domain": "compute.googleapis.com",
        "metadata": {
          "zone": "us-east1-a",
          "vmType": "e2-medium",
          "attachment": "local-ssd=3,nvidia-t4=2",
          "zonesWithCapacity": "us-central1-f,us-central1-c"
        }
      },
      {
        "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.LocalizedMessage",
        "locale": "en-US",
        "message": "An <e2-medium> VM instance with <local-ssd=3,nvidia-t4=2> is currently unavailable in the <us-east1-a> zone. Consider trying your request in the <us-central1-f,us-central1-c> zone(s), which currently has/have capacity to accommodate your request. Alternatively, you can try your request again with a different VM hardware configuration or at a later time. For more information, see the troubleshooting documentation."
      },
      {
        "@type": "type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.Help",
        "links": [
          {
            "description": "Additional information on this error",
            "url": "https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/resource-error"
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

#### google.rpc.Status

Services must return a [`google.rpc.Status`][Status] message when an API
error occurs. For each error the service **must** populate the `message`
string in [`google.rpc.Status`][Status] as follows:

- present a developer-facing, human-readable "debug message"
- present the message in the service's native language to explain both
  the error and offer an actionable resolution to it ([citation][Error
  model])

**Note:** Sometimes a service will elect to always present
`Status.message` in English rather than the application's native
language so that messages are easily searchable in common knowledge
bases, such as StackOverflow™.

Important points:

- This `message` string is considered a problem description. It is
  intended for developers to understand the problem and is more
  detailed than [`ErrorInfo.reason`][ErrorInfo-reason], discussed in the
  next section.
- Use simple descriptive language that is easy to understand (without
  technical jargon) to clearly state the problem that results in an
  error.
- For pre-existing (brownfield) APIs, the information in
  `google.rpc.Status` already exists and can’t be changed. In this
  case, do not edit anything in this `google.rpc.Status`, because some
  users might have automation running against the pre-existing content.
  For example, any changes in text for the `message` string could cause
  breakages. For more information, see [Changing Error
  Messages](#changing-error-messages).

##### [google.rpc.Status payload][Status]

Details of this object are summarized in the following fields, field
descriptions, and examples:

- `code int32`
  - The status code, which **must** be an enum value of
    [`google.rpc.Code`][Code].
  - *Example*: 8
- `message string`
  - A developer-facing error message, which **should** be in English.
    Any user-facing error message **should** be located in the
    LocalizedMessage payload.
  - *Example message*: \"The zone \'us-east1-a\' does not have enough
    resources available to fulfill the request. Try a different zone, or
    try again later.\"
- `details Object (repeated)`
  - Additional text details about the error, which includes
    `ErrorInfo`,`LocalizedMessage`, and so on.
  - *Example*: Described in the [ErrorDetails](#error-details) section.


**Important:** In the context of the `google.rpc.Status` protobuf
message, the value of the field `code` is the numeric equivalent to the
enum value chosen from [`google.rpc.Code`][Code]. For example, if
[`INVALID_ARGUMENT`][InvalidArgument] is chosen, the value of `code`
will be `3` (in the context of the Protobuf message,
`google.rpc.Status`). However, when the error is expressed as JSON, as
in the [sample above](#json-representation), the value of the field by
the same name, `"code"`, is the HTTP status code equivalent of the
selected `google.rpc.Code`. For example, the value of the field `"code"`
in the JSON reply would be `400`.

#### [ErrorDetails][details]

Google defines a set of [standard detail payloads][details] for error
details, which cover most common needs for API errors.  Services
**should** use these standard detail payloads when feasible.

Structured details with machine-readable identifiers **must** be used so
that users can write code against specific aspects of the error. Error
message strings **may** change over time; however, if an error message
does not have a machine-readable identifier *in addition to* the `code`
string, changing the error message **must** be considered a
backwards-incompatible change.

The following section describes `ErrorInfo`, `LocalizedMessage`, and
`Help` in more detail.

##### Uniqueness

Each type of detail payload **must** be included at most once. For
example, there **must not** be more than one [`BadRequest`][BadRequest]
message in the `details`, but there **may** be a `BadRequest` and a
[`PreconditionFailure`][PreconditionFailure].

##### ErrorInfo payload

The [`ErrorInfo`][ErrorInfo] message is the required way to send a
machine-readable identifier. All error responses **must** include an
`ErrorInfo` payload in `details`.  Variable information **should** be
included in `metadata` in `ErrorInfo` and **must** be included if it
appears within an error message.

When introducing an error that represents a failure scenario that did
not previously occur for the service, the payload **must** include
`ErrorInfo` and any variables found in dynamic segments of the error
message **must** be present in `ErrorInfo.metadata` (See [Dynamic
variables](#dynamic-variables).)

**Note:** `ErrorInfo` represents a special case. There **must** be
exactly one `ErrorInfo`. It is required.

[ErrorInfo Payload][ErrorInfo]

Details of this object are summarized in the following fields, field
descriptions, and examples:

- `reason string`
  - A short snake_case description of why the error occurred. Error
    reasons are unique within a particular domain of errors. The error
    reason **must** do the following:
  - Be at most 63 characters and match a regular expression of
    `/[A-Z][A-Z0-9_]+[A-Z0-9]/`, which represents UPPER_SNAKE_CASE.
  - Be meaningful enough for a human reader to understand what the
    reason refers to.
  - Be unique and consumable by machine actors for automation.
  - *Example*:  CPU_AVAILABILITY<br>
    Distill your error message into its simplest form. For example, the
    `reason string` could be one of the following text examples in
    UPPER_SNAKE_CASE: `UNAVAILABLE`, `NO_STOCK`, `CHECKED_OUT`,
    `AVAILABILITY_ERROR`, if your error message is,

    > The Book, "The Great Gatsby", is unavailable at the Library,
    > "Garfield East". It is expected to be available again on 2199-05-13.

  - In contrast, using either of the following reasons is not
    recommended: `THE_BOOK_YOU_WANT_IS_NOT_AVAILABLE`, `ERROR`. And,
    using either of the following reasons breaches the required
    formatting and is not allowed: `librariesAreGreat`, `noBooks`.

- `domain string`
  - The logical grouping to which the `reason` belongs. The error domain
    is typically the registered service name of the tool or product that
    generated the error. The domain must be a globally unique value.
  - *Example*:<br>`pubsub.googleapis.com`

- `metadata map`
  - Additional structured details about this error, which **should**
    provide important context for customers to identify resolution
    steps.  Keys **should** match `/[a-z][a-zA-Z0-9-_]+/`, and be
    limited to 64 characters in length. When identifying the current
    value of an exceeded limit, the units **should** be contained in the
    key, not the value.
  - *Example*:
    ```
    "vmType": "e2-medium",
    "attachment": "local-ssd=3,nvidia-t4=2",
    "zone": "us-east1-a"
    ```
  - For guidance on using the metadata map, see [Dynamic
    Variables](#dynamic-variables).

##### Dynamic variables

The best, actionable error messages include dynamic segments. These
variable parts of the message are specific to a particular request.
Without such context, it is unlikely that the message will be fully
actionable by the user.

This practice is critical so that machine actors do not need to rely on
`LocalizedMessage.message`, which is subject to change and is not part
of the API contract.

Consider the following example:

> The Book, "The Great Gatsby", is unavailable at the Library, "Garfield
> East".  It is expected to be available again on 2199-05-13.

The preceding error message is made actionable by the context, both
originating from the request, the title of the Book, the name of the
Library, and by the information that is known only by the service, that
is, the expected return date of the Book.

All dynamic variables found in error messages **must** also be present
in the `map<string, string>`, `ErrorInfo.metadata` (found on the
*required* `ErrorInfo`). For example, the `metadata` map for the sample
error message above will include *at least* the following key/value
pairs:

```
bookTitle: "The Great Gatsby"
library: "Garfield East"
expectedReturnDate: "2199-05-13"
```

The following example shows an additional example of a metadata map for
information about virtual machines:

```
vmType: "<VM-TYPE>",
attachment: "<ATTACHMENT>"
zone: "<ZONE>"
```

Dynamic variables that do not appear in an error message **may** also be
included in `metadata` to provide additional information to the client
to be used programmatically.

Once present in `metadata`, keys **must** continue to be included in the
map for the error payload to be backwards compatible, even if the value
for a particular key is empty. Keys **must** be expressed as lower
camel-case.

##### Localization

If a localized error message is required, the service **must** include
[`google.rpc.LocalizedMessage`][LocalizedMessage] in `Status.details`.
The value of the `Status.message` string **should** be presented in the
service's native language in the `LocalizedMessage.message` string,
while also ensuring that the `locale` string shows the correct language.

##### LocalizedMessage payload

The LocalizedMessage payload **should** contain the complete resolution
to the error. If more information is needed than can fit in this
payload, then additional resolution information **must** be provided in
the Help payload.  See the [Help payload](#help-payload)
section for guidance.

For pre-existing (brownfield) APIs, the content in this `message` string
will differ from the `message` string in `google.rpc.status`.

[LocalizedMessage Payload][LocalizedMessage]

Details of this object are summarized in the following fields, field
descriptions, and examples:

- `locale string`
  - The locale that follows the specification defined in [IETF
    bcp47](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt) (Tags for
    Identifying Languages).
  - *Example*: **"en-US"**, **"fr-CH"**, **"es-MX"**
- `message string`
  - The error message that the customer will receive through their
    chosen service, which **should** include a brief description of the
    error and a call to action to resolve the error. The message
    **should** include, where needed, data provided in other fields such
    as metadata.
  - Give users clear and concise instructions for resolving the error,
    which **must** be explicit as possible; for example:

    > Consider trying your request in the <AVAILABLE-ZONE-1>,
    > <AVAILABLE-ZONE-N> zone(s), which currently has/have capacity to
    > accommodate your request. Alternatively, you can try your request
    > again with a different VM hardware configuration or at a later
    > time.

  - If the error resolution exceeds the number of characters supported in
    the problem description (`message` string of `google.rpc.Status`),
    or requires multiple troubleshooting steps, include the most
    common resolution in the message and use the `Help` payload to
    link to relevant documentation.

##### Help payload

When `LocalizedMessage.message` doesn’t provide the user sufficient
context or actionable next steps, or if there are multiple points of
failure that need to be considered in troubleshooting, a link to
supplemental troubleshooting documentation **must** be provided in the
`Help` payload.

Provide this information in addition to a clear problem definition and
actionable resolution, not as an alternative to them; for example.

**Note:** For more information, see the troubleshooting documentation:
[https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/resource-error][resource-error].

[Help payload][Help]

Details of this object are summarized in the following fields, field
descriptions, and examples:

- `description string`
  - Describes what the link offers.
  - *Example*: "Troubleshooting documentation for STOCKOUT errors"
- `url string`
  - The URL of the link. For error documentation this must follow the
    standardized format listed in the following example.
  - *Example*:
      https://cloud.google.com/PRODUCT/docs/ERROR-REASON

### Error messages

The following sections describe best practices for error messages not
described previously.

#### Changing error messages

##### Method

The method of changing error messages depends on whether an ErrorInfo
payload is present in the message.

If the error message contains ErrorInfo payload (a machine-readable
identifier):

- `Status.message` *string* and `LocalizedMessage.message` *string* can
   change
- New metadata fields can be added
- However, existing metadata fields **must not** be removed and existing
  metadata field keys cannot be modified.

If the error message does *not* contain ErrorInfo payload (usually for
pre-existing APIs):

- The `LocalizedMessage.message` *string* can change
- However, the `Status.message` *string* **must** not be changed, as
  this change is backward-incompatible.

##### Message alignment

`LocalizedMessage` is populated with the same message as
`Status.message`. Should you choose, you can also present a different
`LocalizedMessage.message` from `Status.message`. For reasons why or why not,
 see [the rationale](#LocalizedMessage).

Keeping the aforementioned guidance in mind, the safest and recommended
method to update an error message for a service is to add
[`google.rpc.LocalizedMessage`][LocalizedMessage] to
[`Status.details`][Status details].  `LocalizedMessage` is meant for
displaying messages to end users.

Add as much information as the consumer of the error needs to resolve
the error, but succinctly.

When including `LocalizedMessage`, both `locale` and `message` **must**
be populated. If the service is to be localized, the value of `locale`
**must** change dynamically. See "[Localization](#localization)".
Otherwise, `locale` **must** always present the service's default
locale; for example, "en-US".

When adding an error message using `LocalizedMessage`, `ErrorInfo`
**must** be introduced either before or at the same time. If there are
dynamic segments found in the text, the values of these variables
**must** be included in `ErrorInfo.metadata`. See, "[Dynamic
variables](#dynamic-variables)".

**Warning:** If `LocalizedMessage` is released without `ErrorInfo`, the
same concerns regarding changing the value of the `message` field of
`LocalizedMissage` apply: clients may misuse this textual error
message--matching on string content.

### Partial errors

APIs **should not** support partial errors. Partial errors add
significant complexity for users, because they usually sidestep the use
of error codes, or move those error codes into the response message,
where the user **must** write specialized error handling logic to
address the problem.

However, occasionally partial errors are necessary, particularly in bulk
operations where it would be hostile to users to fail an entire large
request because of a problem with a single entry.

Methods that require partial errors **should** use [long-running
operations][], and the method **should** put partial failure information
in the metadata message. The errors themselves **must** still be
represented with a [`google.rpc.Status`][Status] object.

### Permission Denied

If the user does not have permission to access the resource or parent,
regardless of whether or not it exists, the service **must** error with
`PERMISSION_DENIED` (HTTP 403). Permission **must** be checked prior to
checking if the resource or parent exists.

If the user does have proper permission, but the requested resource or
parent does not exist, the service **must** error with `NOT_FOUND` (HTTP
404).

## Rationale

### Requiring ErrorInfo

`ErrorInfo` is required because it further identifies an error. With
only approximately twenty [available values][Code] for `Status.status`,
it is difficult to disambiguate one error from another across an entire
[API Service][API Service].

Also, error messages often contain dynamic segments that express
variable information, so there needs to be machine-readable component of
*every* error response that enables clients to use such information
programmatically.

### LocalizedMessage

`LocalizedMessage` was selected as the location to present alternate
error messages. This is desirable when clients need to display a crafted
error message directly to end users. `LocalizedMessage` can be used with
a static `locale`.  This may seem misleading, but it allows the service
to eventually localize without having to duplicate or move the error
message, which would be a backwards incompatible change.

Reasons to present the same error message in both locations include the following:

- The service plans to localize either immediately or in the near future. See,
  "[Localization](#localization)".
- This practice enables clients to find an error message consistently in one
  location, `LocalizedMessaage.message`, across all methods of the API Service.

Reasons to present an error message in `LocalizedMessage.message` that
differs from `Status.message` include the following:

- The service requires an end-user-facing error message that differs
  from the "debug message".
- Ongoing, iterative error message improvements are expected.

### Updating Status.message

**Because Status.message is part of the API contract**, avoid updating
it entirely in favor of updating LocalizedMessage; for example, clients
often perform string matches on the text to differentiate one error for
another and even parse the error message to extract variables from
dynamic segments. 

Clients **must** only perform string matches if their only option for
extracting dynamic information is the message itself. If structured data
is present in metadata, the recommended practice is to key into that
data instead.

## Further reading

- For which error codes to retry, see [AIP-194][aip-194].
- For how to retry errors in client libraries, see
  [AIP-4221][aip-4221].

## Changelog

- **2024-01-10**: Incorporate guidance for writing effective messages.
- **2023-05-17**: Change the recommended language for `Status.message` to be
  the service's native language rather than English.
- **2023-05-17**: Specify requirements for changing error messages.
- **2023-05-10**: Require [`ErrorInfo`][ErrorInfo] for all error responses.
- **2023-05-04**: Require uniqueness by message type for error details.
- **2022-11-04**: Added guidance around PERMISSION_DENIED errors previously
  found in other AIPs.
- **2022-08-12**: Reworded/Simplified intro to add clarity to the intent.
- **2020-01-22**: Added a reference to the [`ErrorInfo`][ErrorInfo] message.
- **2019-10-14**: Added guidance restricting error message mutability to if
  there is a machine-readable identifier present.
- **2019-09-23**: Added guidance about error message strings being able to
    change.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

[aip-4221]: https://google.aip.dev/client-libraries/4221
[details]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto
[ErrorInfo]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/6f3fcc058ff29989f6d3a71557a44b5e81b897bd/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L27-L76
[ErrorInfo-reason]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L57
[PreconditionFailure]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/6f3fcc058ff29989f6d3a71557a44b5e81b897bd/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L139-L166
[BadRequest]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/477a59d764428136ba1d857a9633c0d231de6efa/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L168-L218
[LocalizedMessage]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/e9897ed945336e2dc967b439ac7b4be6d2c62640/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L275-L285
[grpc status code documentation]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/statuscodes.md
[Code]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/code.proto
[Status]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/status.proto
[Status details]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/aeae5ea2b01ece6c0cee046ae84b881cdc62b95d/google/rpc/status.proto#L46-L48
[long-running operations]: ./0151.md
[API Service]: https://cloud.google.com/apis/design/glossary#api_service
[writing-tone]: https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/error-messages/set-tone
[Error model]: https://cloud.google.com/apis/design/errors#error_model
[Help]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L256
[resource-error]: https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/resource-error
[InvalidArgument]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/d4acb64370d333024a167551e7da854506109ba2/google/rpc/code.proto#L52-L58

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
