---
id: 194
state: approved
created: 2019-08-16
placement:
  category: polish
  order: 40
---

# Automatic retry configuration

RPCs sometimes fail. When one does, the client performing the RPC needs to know
whether it is safe to retry the operation. When status codes are used
consistently across multiple APIs, clients can respond to failures
appropriately.

## Guidance

Clients **should** automatically retry requests for which repeated runs would
not cause unintended state changes, which are non-transactional, and which are
[unary](https://grpc.io/docs/guides/concepts/).

Clients **should not** automatically retry transactional requests; instead
these requests **should** have application-level retry logic that retries the
entire transaction block from the start.

Clients **should not** automatically retry requests in which repeated runs
would cause unintended state changes.

**Note:** This AIP does not cover client streaming or bi-directional streaming.

**Note:** For client side retry behavior in the client libraries: see
[AIP-4221][].

### Retryable codes

For methods listed as retryable above, clients **should** retry the following
error codes:

- `UNAVAILABLE`: This code generally results from network hiccups, and is
  generally transient. It is retryable under the expectation that the
  connection will become available (soon).

### Non-retryable codes

The following codes **should not** be automatically retried for any request:

- `OK`: The request succeeded.
- `CANCELLED`: An application can cancel a request, which **must** be honored.
- `DEADLINE_EXCEEDED`: An application can set a deadline, which **must** be
  honored.
- `INVALID_ARGUMENT`: Retrying a request with an invalid argument will never
  succeed.
- `DATA_LOSS`: This is an unrecoverable error and **must** immediately be
  surfaced to the application.

### Generally non-retryable codes:

The following codes generally **should not** be automatically retried for any
request:

- `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED`: This code may be a signal that quota is exhausted.
  Retries therefore may not be expected to work for several hours; meanwhile
  the retries may have billing implications. If `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` is used
  for other reasons than quota and the expected time for the resource to become
  available is much shorter, it may be retryable.
- `INTERNAL`: This code generally means that some internal part of the system
  has failed, and usually means a bug should be filed against the system. These
  **should** immediately be surfaced to the application.
- `UNKNOWN`: Unlike `INTERNAL`, this code is reserved for truly
  unknown-to-the-system errors, and therefore may not be safe to retry. These
  **should** immediately be surfaced to the application.
- `ABORTED`: This code typically means that the request failed due to a
  sequencer check failure or transaction abort. These **should not** be retried
  for an individual request; they **should** be retried at a level higher (the
  entire transaction, for example).

Some codes **may** be automatically retried if a system is designed without
synchronization or signaling between various components. For example, client
might retry `NOT_FOUND` on a read operation, which is designed to hang forever
until the resource is created. However, these types of systems are generally
discouraged.

Therefore, the following codes **should not** be automatically retried for any
request:

- `NOT_FOUND`: A client **should not** retry until a resource is created.
- `ALREADY_EXISTS`: A client **should not** retry until a resource is deleted.
- `PERMISSION_DENIED`: A client **should not** retry until it has permission.
- `UNAUTHORIZED`: A client **should not** retry until it is authorized.
- `UNAUTHENTICATED`: A client **should not** retry until it is authenticated.
- `FAILED_PRECONDITION`: A client **should not** retry until system state
  changes.
- `OUT_OF_RANGE`: A client **should not** retry until the range is extended.
- `UNIMPLEMENTED`: A client **should not** retry until the RPC is implemented.

## Further reading

- For parallel or retried request disambiguation, see [AIP-154](./0154.md).
