---
id: 203
state: approved
created: 2018-07-17
placement:
  category: fields
  order: 15
---

# Field behavior documentation

When defining fields in protocol buffers, it is customary to explain to users
certain aspects of the field's behavior (such as whether it is required or
optional). Additionally, it can be useful for other tools to understand this
behavior (for example, to optimize client library signatures).

## Guidance

APIs use the `google.api.field_behavior` annotation to describe well-understood
field behavior, such as a field being required or immutable.

```proto
// The audio data to be recognized.
RecognitionAudio audio = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];
```

- APIs **must** apply the `google.api.field_behavior` annotation on every field
  on a message or sub-message used in a request.
- The annotation **must** include any [google.api.FieldBehavior][] values that
  accurately describe the behavior of the field.
  - `FIELD_BEHAVIOR_UNSPECIFIED` **must not** be used.
- APIs **must** at minimum use one of `REQUIRED`, `OPTIONAL`, or `OUTPUT_ONLY`.

**Warning:** Although `field_behavior` does not impact proto-level behavior,
many clients (e.g. CLIs and SDKs) rely on them to generate code. Thoroughly
review and consider which values are relevant when adding a new field.

Fields with no annotation are interpreted as `OPTIONAL` for
backwards-compatility. Nontheless, this annotation **must not** be omitted.

**Note:** The vocabulary given in this document is for _descriptive_ purposes
only, and does not itself add any validation. The purpose is to consistently
document this behavior for clients.

### field behavior of nested messages

`google.api.field_behavior` annotations on a nested message are independent of
the annotations of the parent.

For example, a nested message can have a field behavior of `REQUIRED` while the
parent field can be `OPTIONAL`:

```proto
message Title {
  string text = 1 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];
}

message Slide {
  Title title = 1 [(google.api.field_behavior) = OPTIONAL];
}
```

In the case above, if a `title` is specified, the `text` field is required.

## Vocabulary

### Identifier

The use of `IDENTIFIER` indicates that a field within a resource message is used
to identify the resource. It **must** be attached to the `name` field and **must
not** be attached to any other field (see [fields representing resource names]).

The `IDENTIFIER` value conveys that the field is not accepted as input (i.e.
`OUTPUT_ONLY`) in the context of a create method, while also being considered
`IMMUTABLE` and accepted as input for mutation methods that accept the
resource as the primary input e.g. [Standard Update][aip-134].

This annotation **must not** be applied to references to other resources within
a message.

### Immutable

The use of `IMMUTABLE` indicates that a field on a resource cannot be changed
after its creation. This can apply to either fields that are input or outputs,
required or optional.

When a service receives an immutable field in an update request (or similar),
even if included in the update mask, the service **should** ignore the field if
the value matches, but **should** error with `INVALID_ARGUMENT` if a change is
requested.

Potential use cases for immutable fields (this is not an exhaustive list) are:

- Attributes of resources that are not modifiable for the lifetime of the
  application (e.g. a disk type).

**Note:** Fields which are "conditionally immutable" **must not** be given the
immutable annotation.

### Input only

The use of `INPUT_ONLY` indicates that the field is provided in requests and
that the corresponding field will not be included in output.

Additionally, a field **should** only be described as input only if it is a
field in a resource message or a field of a message included within a resource
message. Notably, fields in request messages (a message which only ever acts as
an argument to an RPC, with a name usually ending in `Request`) **should not**
be described as input only because this is already implied.

Potential use cases for input only fields (this is not an exhaustive list) are:

- The `ttl` field as described in AIP-214.

**Warning:** Input only fields are rare and should be considered carefully
before use.

### Optional

The use of `OPTIONAL` indicates that a field is not required.

A field **may** be described as optional if it is a field on a request message
(a message that is an argument to an RPC, usually ending in `Request`), or a
field on a submessage.

### Output only

The use of `OUTPUT_ONLY` indicates that the field is provided in responses, but
that including the field in a message in a request does nothing (the server
**must** clear out any value in this field and **must not** throw an error as a
result of the presence of a value in this field on input). Similarly, services
**must** ignore the presence of output only fields in update field masks (see:
AIP-161).

Additionally, a field **should** only be described as output only if it is a
field in a resource message, or a field of a message farther down the tree.
Notably, fields in response messages (a message which only ever acts as a
return value to an RPC, usually ending in `Response`) **should not** be
described as output only because this is already implied.

Output only fields **may** be set to empty values if appropriate to the API.

Potential use cases for output only fields (this is not an exhaustive list)
are:

- Create or update timestamps.
- Derived or structured information based on original user input.
- Properties of a resource assigned by the service which can not be altered.

### Required

The use of `REQUIRED` indicates that the field **must** be present (and set to
a non-empty value) on the request or resource.

A field **should** only be described as required if _either_:

- It is a field on a resource that a user provides somewhere as input. In this
  case, the resource is only valid if a "truthy" value is _stored_.
  - When [creating][aip-133] the resource, a value **must** be provided for the
    field on the create request.
  - When [updating][aip-134] the resource, the user **may** omit the field
    provided that the field is also absent from the field mask, indicating no
    change to the field (otherwise it **must** be provided).
- It is a field on a request message (a message that is an argument to an RPC,
  with a name usually ending in `Request`). In this case, a value **must** be
  provided as part of the request, and failure to do so **must** cause an error
  (usually `INVALID_ARGUMENT`).

We define the term "truthy" above as follows:

- For primitives, values other than `0`, `0.0`, empty string/bytes, and `false`
- For repeated fields maps, values with at least one entry
- For messages, any message with at least one "truthy" field.

Fields **should not** be described as required in order to signify:

- A field which will always be present in a response.
- A field which is conditionally required in some situations.
- A field on any message (including messages that are resources) which is never
  used as user input.

**Note:** In most cases, empty values (such as `false` for booleans, `0` for
integers, or the unspecified value for enums) are indistinguishable from unset
values, and therefore setting a required field to a falsy value yields an
error. A corollary to this is that a required boolean must be set to `true`.

### Unordered List

The use of `UNORDERED_LIST` on a repeated field of a resource indicates that
the service does not guarantee the order of the items in the list.

A field **should** be described as an unordered list if the service does not
guarantee that the order of the elements in the list will match the order that
the user sent, including a situation where the service will sort the list on
the user's behalf.

A resource with an unordered list **may** return the list in a stable order, or
**may** return the list in a randomized, unstable order.

## Backwards compatibility

Adding or changing `google.api.field_behavior` values can represent a semantic
change in the API that is perceived as incompatible for existing clients. The
following are examples of backwards incompatible changes with
`google.api.field_behavior`:

* Adding `REQUIRED` to an existing field previously considered `OPTIONAL`
(implicitly or otherwise)
* Adding a new field annotated as `REQUIRED` to an existing request message
* Adding `OUTPUT_ONLY` to an existing field previously accepted as input
* Adding `INPUT_ONLY` to an existing field previously emitted as output
* Adding `IMMUTABLE` to an existing field previously considered mutable
* Removing `OUTPUT_ONLY` from an existing field previously ignored as input
* Removing `IDENTIFIER` from an existing field.

There are some changes that *are* backwards compatible, which are as follows:

* Adding `OPTIONAL` to an existing field
* Adding `IDENTIFIER` to an existing `name` field
* Changing from `REQUIRED` to `OPTIONAL` on an existing field
* Changing from `OUTPUT_ONLY` and/or `IMMUTABLE` to `IDENTIFIER` on an existing
  field
* Removing `REQUIRED` from an existing field
* Removing `INPUT_ONLY` from an existing field previously excluded in responses
* Removing `IMMUTABLE` from an existing field previously considered immutable

## Rationale

### Identifier field behavior

Resource names, the primary identifiers for any compliant resource, are never
fully constructed by the user on create. Such fields are typically assigned
`OUTPUT_ONLY` field behavior. They are, however, also often consumed as
the primary identifier in scenarios where the resource itself is the primary
request payload. Such fields could *not* be considered `OUTPUT_ONLY`.
Furthermore, in mutation requests, like Standard Update, the resource name as
the primary identifier cannot be changed in place. Such fields are typically
assigned `IMMUTABLE` field behavior. These conflicting and context-dependent
field behaviors meant that a new value was necessary to single out and convey
the behavior of the resource name field.

### Required set of annotations

A field used in a request message must be either an input or an output.

In the case of an output, the `OUTPUT_ONLY` annotation is sufficient.

In the case of an input, a field is either required or optional, and therefore
should have at least the `REQUIRED` or `OPTIONAL` annotation, respectively.
Only providing `INPUT_ONLY` does not convey the necessity of the field, so
specifying either `REQUIRED` or `OPTIONAL` is still necessary.

### Requiring field behavior

By including the field behavior annotation for each field, the overall behavior
that the resource exhibits is more clearly defined. Clearly defined field
behavior improves programmatic clients and user understanding.

Requiring the annotation also forces the API author to explicitly consider the
behavior when initially authoring of the API.

Modifying field behavior after initial authoring can result in
backwards-incompatible changes in clients. For example, making an optional field
required results in backwards-incompatible changes in the method signature of an
RPC or a resource in a [Declarative client][]. See the
[Backwards compatibility](#backwards-compatibility) section for more detailed
compatibility guidance.

## History

In 2023-05 field_behavior was made mandatory. Prior to this change, the
annotation was often omitted. Its values are relied upon to produce high quality
clients. Furthermore, adding or changing some of the field_behavior values after
the fact within a major version can be backwards-incompatible. See the
[Backwards compatibility](#backwards-compatibility) section for more detailed
compatibility guidance.

The benefits of requiring field_behavior at the time that the API is authored
surpass the costs to clients and API users of not doing so.

[aip-133]: ./0133.md
[aip-134]: ./0134.md
[aip-180]: ./0180.md
[google.api.FieldBehavior]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/api/field_behavior.proto#L49
[Declarative client]: ./0009.md#declarative-clients
[fields representing resource names]: ./0122.md#fields-representing-resource-names

## Changelog

- **2023-09-14**: Clarify that nested behavior and parent behavior are
  independent.
- **2023-08-25**: Add guidance on `IDENTIFIER`.
- **2023-07-20**: Describe compatibility guidance with new section.
- **2023-05-24**: Clarify that `IMMUTABLE` does not imply input nor required.
- **2023-05-10**: Added guidance to require the annotation.
- **2020-12-15**: Added guidance for `UNORDERED_LIST`.
- **2020-05-27**: Clarify behavior when receiving an immutable field in an
  update.
- **2019-12-05**: Added guidance on output only fields in field masks.
- **2019-06-18**: Use the machine-readable annotation, not comments.
