---
id: 205
state: approved
created: 2019-02-18
placement:
  category: process
  order: 20
redirect_from: /beta-blocker
---

# Beta-blocking changes

APIs often release an Alpha version of their API in order to get early feedback
from customers. This API is provisional and can change many times before the
important feedback is incorporated and the API is made stable for Beta.

Since the purpose of Alpha is to gather feedback, the API does not need to be
perfect yet, and it's not strictly necessary for API authors to address every
usability concern or address every point in the API standards. Often, API
authors and API reviewers will not agree on the best design, and the best way
to find out is by having users try out the API.

However, once the feedback has been collected and the API is going to be
promoted to Beta, usability concerns and style issues do need to be addressed.
In order to ensure that these issues are not forgotten, they should be
explicitly documented in the API.

## Guidance

If an API has usability concerns or violates API standards, and the present
design should receive additional scrutiny before being carried through to the
Beta version, there **must** be an internal comment linking to this document
using its descriptive link ([aip.dev/beta-blocker]()) to ensure that the design
is corrected before the API is released to Beta.

The comment **must** also indicate what kind of change should be made for Beta.
For example:

```proto
message InputConfig {
  // Parameters for input.
  // (-- aip.dev/beta-blocker: Convert well-known parameters into explicit
  //     fields before the Beta launch. --)
  map<string, string> parameters = 1;
}
```

If an exception to API standards _does_ need to be carried through to Beta and
GA, see [AIP-200][].

[aip-200]: ./0200.md
