---
id: 211
state: approved
created: 2021-02-24
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 115
---

# Authorization checks

The majority of operations, whether reads or writes, require authorization:
permission to do the thing the user is asking to do. Additionally, it is
important to be careful how much information is provided to _unauthorized_
users, since leaking information can be a security concern.

## Guidance

Services **must** check authorization before validating any request, to ensure
both a secure API surface and a consistent user experience. An operation
**may** require multiple permissions or preconditions in order to grant
authorization.

If a request can not pass the authorization check for any reason, the service
**must** error with `PERMISSION_DENIED`, and the corresponding error message
**should** look like: "Permission `{p}` denied on resource `{r}` (or it might
not exist)." This avoids leaking resource existence.

If it is not possible to determine authorization for a resource because the
resource does not exist, the service **should** check authorization to read
children on the parent resource, and return `NOT_FOUND` if the authorization
check passes.

### Multiple operations

A service could encounter a situation where it has two different operations
with two different permissions, either of which would reveal the existence of a
resource if called, but a user only has permission to call one of them.

In this situation, the service **should** still only check for authorization
applicable to the operation being called, and **should not** try to "help out"
by checking for related authorization that would provide permission to reveal
existence, because such algorithms are complicated to implement correctly and
prone to accidental leaks.

For example, posit a scenario where:

- A resource exists within a given collection that a user is unable to read.
- The user _does_ have the ability to create other resources, and the
  collection uses user-specified IDs (meaning that a failure because of a
  duplicate ID would reveal existence).

In this situation, the get or create methods **should** still only check
_their_ permissions when determining what error to return, and not one
another's.

## Rationale

[RFC 7231 ยง6.5.3][] states that services are permitted to use `404 Not Found`
in lieu of `403 Forbidden` in situations where the service does not want to
divulge existence, whereas this AIP argues for the use of `PERMISSION_DENIED`
(which corresponds to `403 Forbidden` in HTTP) instead. We take this position
for the following reasons:

- The practice of "getting `404 Not Found` until you have enough permission to
  get `403 Forbidden`" is counter-intuitive and increases the difficulty of
  troubleshooting.
  - A service _could_ ameliorate this by sending information about missing
    permissions while still using the `404 Not Found` status code, but this
    constitutes a mixed message.
- While `403 Forbidden` is essentially always an error requiring manual action,
  `404 Not Found` is often a valid response that the application can handle
  (e.g. "get or create"); overloading it for permission errors deprives
  applications of this benefit.
- RFC 7231 ยง6.5.4 states that `404 Not Found` results are cacheable, but
  permission errors are not generally cacheable. Sending explicit cache
  controls on a conditional basis could ameliorate this, but would defeat the
  purpose.
- The guidance here is more consistent with most other real-world authorization
  systems.

[rfc 7231 ยง6.5.3]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.3

## Changelog

- **2021-05-11:** Added a more detailed "Rationale" section.
