---
id: 213
state: approved
created: 2018-08-17
placement:
  category: protobuf
  order: 20
---

# Common components

In general, API reviewers encourage API producers to keep their APIs mostly
self-contained, except for a relatively small set of common protos which are
safe to import (e.g. [`google.protobuf.Timestamp`][timestamp]). This is for
good reason: APIs generally need to be able to move forward independently of
one another, and mutual dependencies can cause downstream APIs to be forced
into taking major version changes or even lead to dependency conflicts.

However, there are also cases where common structures are valuable, especially
where a concept is well-known and it is sufficiently clear that it will not
change. Common protos serve this use case. There are two forms of common protos:
organization-specific and global.

## Guidance for API protos

The public representation of APIs **must** be self-contained, meaning that
all protos used by the API originate in the same proto `package`, except for
common protos, which **may** be used freely in any API.

APIs **must not** define a set of API-specific common protos which live outside
their versioning structure. (This is sometimes attempted as a way of reusing
messages across multiple versions. The complexities introduced are definitely
not worth the benefits.)

APIs **must not** directly depend on protos defined in other APIs. Instead,
they should copy and paste the applicable messages into their own API. When
doing so, APIs **should** keep the field names and numbers the same. To refer
to resources from other APIs, specify [resource names](https://aip.dev/122)
using `string` fields.

### Rationale

When one API depends on protos defined by another API, this introduces
uncertainty in terms of customer-expected behavior and client library
dependency management. Suppose `google.cloud.library.v1` depends on
the protos (rather than abstract resources) in `google.cloud.movies.v2`. Any
change to `google.cloud.movies.v2` can cause problems. For example:

- If a field is added to a message in `google.cloud.movies.v2`, should
  customers using `google.cloud.library.v1` expect to see it? If so, how soon
  after the field has been added? What about other API changes?
- If the whole major version is deprecated (typically after v3 has been
  released), does that mean `google.cloud.library.v1` has to change to use
  `google.cloud.movies.v3`, and if so, does that require a new major version for
  the library API as well?
- How should client library versioning reflect changes to dependent APIs?

Keeping APIs isolated from each other, with a limited set of common protos which
are maintained in a highly disciplined way, reduces a lot of the issues with
dependencies.

## Organization-specific common protos

Organizations often have many different APIs all centered around the same set of
concepts which are organization-specific. Where it is safe to share a single
representation across multiple APIs, this can make it much easier for clients to
interact with multiple APIs. Concept-specific client code can be written once,
and messages can be used from the response of one API in the request of another
without clunk copying, for example.

This benefit comes with significant restrictions and limitations, however, and
should not be attempted lightly.

When a common proto is desirable but not genuinely organization-specific, it
**should** be introduced into a global common proto package instead, even if an
organization-specific common proto package has already been created.

## Defining an organization-specific common proto package

Any organization wishing to define a common proto package should first consider
whether they really need to. Introducing a common proto package has costs in
terms of client library packaging, customer documentation, and general
discipline in following the strict limitations. If a single simple message is
going to be shared between only a few APIs, the benefits may not be worth the
costs.

If many APIs can be identified that *definitely* need the same concept,
*and* the organization has confidence that the concept will definitely not need
to change over time or across different APIs, *and* if the concept is clearly
organization-specific (as opposed to a concept that could be usable across)
multiple organizations, then the organization **should** consider creating
an organization-specific common proto package, in consultation with the API
design team.

The organization-specific proto package **must** end in `.type` (e.g.
`google.geo.type` or `google.shopping.type`).

### Limitations of common proto packages

Common protos have no notion of version: while clearly the version history is
available as part of publication to source control, there is no notion of an
API relying on "version 1.1 of common proto X".

To avoid some of the issues described earlier, common proto messages and enums
**should not** change, even in ways that are normally considered to be
backward-compatible (or partially so):

- Fields **should not** be added to existing messages
- Values **should not** be added to existing enums
- While documentation may be clarified, it **should not** change the set of
  valid values for any given field.

New proto messages and enums **may** be added to common proto packages, however.
API teams should be aware that it may take some time for any changes to
propagate through publication to client libraries and other surfaces, and should
allow sufficient time for this to happen before using the new messages and enums
in their APIs.

## Global common protos

The common protos, which public-facing protos for an API **may** safely import,
are as follows:

- [`google.api.*`](https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/api) (but *not* subpackages of `google.api`)
- [`google.longrunning.Operation`](https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/longrunning/operations.proto)
- [`google.protobuf.*`](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/master/src/google/protobuf)
- [`google.rpc.*`](https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/rpc/)
- [`google.type.*`][type]

Note that some common protos may have internal-only fields. APIs **should**
generally only rely on fields which have been
[released into open source](https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis).

Google APIs **may** also import [`google.iam.v1.*`][iam], which provides the
IAM messages used throughout Google.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
[iam]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/tree/master/google/iam/v1

**Note:** Many APIs also import protos from other packages for internal-only
use (e.g. to apply visibility labels or provide instructions to internal
infrastructure). This is acceptable provided that the _public_ protos do not
contain such references.

### Protobuf types

The `google.protobuf` package is somewhat special in that it is shipped with
protocol buffers itself, rather than with API tooling. (For most API designers,
this should be an implementation detail).

This package includes a small library of types useful for representing common
programming language constructs:

- [`google.protobuf.Duration`][duration]: Durations, with nanosecond-level
  precision. The protobuf runtime provides helper functions to convert to and
  from language-native duration objects where applicable (such as Python's
  [`timedelta`][timedelta]).
- [`google.protobuf.Struct`][struct]: JSON-like structures (a dictionary of
  primitives, lists, and other dictionaries). The protobuf runtime provides
  helper functions in most languages to convert struct objects to and from
  JSON.
- [`google.protobuf.Timestamp`][timestamp]: Timestamps, with nanosecond-level
  precision. The protobuf runtime provides helper functions in most languages
  to convert to and from language-native timestamp objects (such as Python's
  [`datetime`][datetime]).

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[datetime]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.datetime
[duration]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/duration.proto
[struct]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/struct.proto
[timedelta]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.timedelta
[timestamp]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/timestamp.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### API Types

The `google.type` package provides a "standard library" of types useful for
representing common concepts in APIs. While types are added from time to time
and the definitive list is always [the code][type], several types deserve note:

- [`google.type.Color`][color]: RGB or RGBA colors.
- [`google.type.Date`][date]: Calendar dates, with no time or time zone
  component.
- [`google.type.DayOfWeek`][day_of_week]: The day of the week, with no other
  date, time, or time zone component.
- [`google.type.LatLng`][lat_lng]: Geographic coordinates.
- [`google.type.Money`][money]: Currency.
- [`google.type.PostalAddress`][postal_address]: Postal addresses in most
  countries.
- [`google.type.TimeOfDay`][time_of_day]: Wall-clock time, with no date or time
  zone component.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[type]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/tree/master/google/type
[color]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/color.proto
[date]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/date.proto
[day_of_week]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/dayofweek.proto
[lat_lng]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/latlng.proto
[money]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/money.proto
[postal_address]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/postal_address.proto
[time_of_day]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/timeofday.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### Adding to common protos

Occasionally, it may be useful to add protos to these packages or to add to the
list of commonly-available protos. In order to do this, [open an issue][] on
the AIP repository in GitHub.

However, some general guidelines are worth noting for this:

- Protos **should** only be promoted to common status if we are certain that
  they will never change (at all -- even in ways that would normally be
  considered backwards compatible). Common protos are generally not versioned,
  and it must be the case that we can rely on the proto to be a complete and
  accurate representation indefinitely.
  - The exception to this is protos describing our infrastructure, which
    **may** have rare, backwards-compatible changes.
- Protos must be applicable to a significant number of APIs for consideration
  as common protos. It is okay for those APIs to be clustered together (e.g.
  all in a single PA).
- There is no good way to "stage" a common proto, because moving references to
  them is effectively not possible. (In other words, it is infeasible to add a
  proto to `google.geo.type.*` and then "graduate" it to `google.type.*`
  later.)
- Adding a common proto requires coordination between several teams, and it may
  take time between when an addition is approved and when it is available for
  use.
- Even after a common proto is added, APIs using local versions must continue
  to do so until they go to the next major version.

In the event that you believe adding a common proto is appropriate, please
[open an issue][].

[open an issue]: https://github.com/googleapis/aip/issues

## Changelog

- **2023-05-XX:** AIP combined with AIP-215 (which is now "replaced"),
  and clarified in terms of organization-specific common protos.
- **2018-08-17:** Initial AIP written.
