---
id: 215
state: approved
created: 2018-10-01
placement:
  category: protobuf
  order: 30
---

# Common component versions

Many APIs may support more than one version at the same time. Often, our first
instinct is to create protos which are intended to be shared between API
versions, and place them in an unversioned "common" directory. A similar
variant to this is an _omitted_ version: a message or service that is
_implicitly_ v1, but has no version in the proto package.

When protos are unversioned, changing them safely (that is, in a backwards
compatible way) is very difficult. For example, adding a field to an
unversioned proto effectively adds the field to all _existing_ versions, which
do not actually support it. This is surprising to users, and creates a
situation where the proto files are not accurate representations of the API
surface.

Additionally, client library generators usually generate a class for each
message in your protos in a language-appropriate namespace. In several
languages, each version of your API is shipped as a _separate_ client library,
and the code generator needs to generate the common messages for your API in
order to ensure a complete package. This makes it difficult to use multiple
APIs with similar dependent messages together.

For omitted versions, the version is effectively hidden, and it becomes more
difficult to reason about release phases (alpha, beta, GA), with no substantive
benefit.

## Guidance

- All protos specific to an API **should** be within the versioned package
  (e.g., `yourapi.v1.SharedProtoMessage`).

- In scenarios where an API doesn't consider itself to have a version, the API
  **must** use `v1`. (Omitted-version protos are prohibited.)

- When a shared proto is identical, that proto **should** be duplicated to the
  other versioned package (e.g., copied and pasted into
  `yourapi.v2.SharedProtoMessage`).

### What if a proto will never change?

There are some situations where it is useful to have an unversioned proto.
These should generally apply to a complete product area or suite of APIs, not
just a single API. In these situations, it may be possible to add it to our
collections of common protos. Common protos are able to be used by many APIs,
and are always unversioned.

Common protos shall always have a package structure ending in `type` (e.g.
`google.type`, `google.cloud.type`).

**Warning:** This is a relatively rare occurrence. If you find yourself adding
protos to your PA's `type` directory frequently, double-check that this is
actually where they belong.

For more information on common protos, consult [AIP-213][].

[aip-213]: ./0213.md
