---
id: 215
state: approved
created: 2018-10-01
placement:
  category: protobuf
  order: 30
---

# API-specific protos

APIs are mostly defined in terms of protos which are API-specific, with
occasional dependencies on common components. Keeping APIs isolated from each
other avoids versioning problems and client library packaging problems.

## Guidance

- All protos specific to an API **must** be within a package with a major version
  (e.g., `google.library.v1`).
- References to resources in other APIs **must** be expressed in terms of
  resource names ([AIP-122][]), rather than using the resource messages.
- When two versions of an API use effectively the same (API-specific) proto
  that proto **must** be duplicated in each version. (In other words, APIs
  **must not** create their own "API-specific common component" packages.)
- Organization-specific common components **may** be placed in a common package,
  as described in [AIP-213][], but **must not** be used by any API outside
  that organization.
- Global common components (also described in AIP-213) **may** be freely used by any API.

## Rationale

When one API depends on protos defined by another API, this introduces uncertainty
in terms of customer-expected behavior and client library dependency management.
Suppose `google.cloud.library.v1` depends on the protos (rather than abstract resources)
in `google.cloud.movies.v2`. Any change to `google.cloud.movies.v2` can cause problems.

For example:

- If a field is added to a message in `google.cloud.movies.v2`, should customers using
  `google.cloud.library.v1` expect to see it? If so, how soon after the field has
  been added? What about other API changes?
- If the whole major version `google.cloud.movies.v2` is deprecated
  (typically after v3 has been released), does that mean `google.cloud.library.v1` has
  to change to use `google.cloud.movies.v3`, and if so, does that require a new major version
  for the library API as well?
- How should client library versioning reflect changes to dependent APIs?

Keeping APIs isolated from each other, with a limited set of common components which are
maintained in a highly disciplined way, reduces a lot of the issues with dependencies.

API-specific common components shared across versions add complexity for client
library generation and packaging, and are inflexible in terms of versioning.
When protos are duplicated because they *start* off the same in multiple versions,
they can still diverge over time as they are isolated from each other.

## Changelog

- **2023-06-27**: Restructured AIPs 215 and 213 for clarity.
- **2023-05-11**: Changed "PA" to "organization".
- **2018-10-01**: Initial AIP written.

[aip-213]: ./0213.md
[aip-122]: ./0122.md
