---
id: 217
state: approved
created: 2019-08-26
placement:
  category: design-patterns
  order: 130
---

# Unreachable resources

Occasionally, a user may ask for a list of resources, and some set of resources
in the list are temporarily unavailable. The most typical use case is while
supporting [Reading Across Collections][aip-159]. For example, a user may ask to
list resources across multiple parent locations, but one of those locations is
temporarily unreachable. In this situation, it is still desirable to provide
the user with all the available resources, while indicating that something is
missing.

## Guidance

If a method to retrieve data is capable of partially failing due to one or more
resources being temporarily unreachable, the response message **must** include
a field to indicate this:

```proto
message ListBooksResponse {
  // The books matching the request.
  repeated Book books = 1;

  // The next page token, if there are more books matching the
  // request.
  string next_page_token = 2;

  // Unreachable resources.
  repeated string unreachable = 3 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = UNORDERED_LIST
  ];
}
```

- The field **must** be a repeated string, and **should** be named
  `unreachable`.
- The field **must** contain the resource names of the resources that are
  unreachable or those that impede reaching the requested collection, such as
  the parent resource of the collection that could not be reached.
  - For example, if an entire location is unreachable, preventing access to the
    localized collection of resources requested, the location resource is
    included.
- The field **must** contain _service-relative_ resource names, and **must not**
  contain full resource names, resource URIs, or simple resource IDs. See
  [AIP-122][aip-122] for definitions.
  - For example, if a `Book` resource is unreachable, the _service-relative_
    resource name `"shelves/scifi1/books/starwars4"` is included in
    `unreachable`, as opposed to the _full_ resource name
    `"//library.googleapis.com/shelves/scifi1/books/starwars4"`, the
    _parent-relative_ resource `"books/starwars4"`, the resource ID
    `"starwars4"`, or the resource URI.
- The response **must not** provide any other information about the issue(s)
  that made the listed resources unreachable.
  - For example, the response cannot contain an extra field with error reasons
    for each `unreachable` entry.
- The service **must** provide a way for the user to make a more specific
  request and receive an error with additional information e.g. via a Standard
  Get or a Standard List targeted at the unreachable collection parent.
  - The service **must** also allow the user to repeat the original call with
    more restrictive parameters.
- The resource names that appear in `unreachable` **may** be heterogeneous.
  - The `unreachable` field definition **should** document what potential
    resources could be provided in this field, and note that it might expand
    later.
  - For example, if both an entire location and a specific resource in a
    different location are unreachable, the unreachable location's name 
    e.g. `"projects/example123/locations/us-east1"` and the unreachable
    resource's name e.g.
    `"projects/example123/locations/europe-west2/instances/example456"` will
    both appear in `unreachable`.
- The `unreachable` field **must not** have semantically meaningful ordering or
  structure within the list. Put differently, `unreachable` **must** be an
  unordered list.
  - As such, the `unreachable` field **must** be annotated with `UNORDERED_LIST`
    field behavior (see [AIP-203][unordered]).

[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[aip-160]: ./0160.md
[unordered]: ./0203.md#unordered-list

**Important:** If a single unreachable location or resource prevents returning
any data by definition (for example, a list request for a single publisher
where that publisher is unreachable), the service **must** fail the entire
request with an error.

### Pagination

While preparing a page of results to fulfill a page fetch RPC e.g. an
[AIP-132][aip-132] Standard List call, if the service encounters any unreachable
resources or collections they **must** do the following:

- Include the resource name for the unreachable resource in the `unreachable`
  response field.
  - The resource name **must** be the most appropriately scoped for the
    unreachable resource or collection.
    - For example, if a specific zone within a region is unreachable, the
      unreachable resource name would be a zonal Location e.g.
      `projects/example/locations/us-west1-a`, but if an entire region is
      unreachable, the resource name would be a regional Location e.g.
      `projects/example/locations/us-west1`.
  - The resource name **must** be included, regardless of restrictive paging
    parameters e.g. `order_by`, when it is identified as unreachable.
- Populate results that were previously considered unreachable on a following
  page if their availability is restored and the paging parameters allow for
  their inclusion.
  - Determining inclusion eligibility based on paging parameters also includes
    any documented default ordering behavior in the absence of user-specified
    ordering in the request.
  - For example, if region `projects/example/locations/us-west1` was unavailable
    in the first page of an ordered paging call, and including its resources
    would violate the ordering, those out-of-order resources are not included in
    the following page.
  - Similarly, if the same exact request is made, and resources previously
    considered unreachable are available again, they **must** be populated,
    within the constraints of the paging parameters.
- Limit the number of unreachable resource names returned in a given response
  if, even after up-scoping the unreachable resource name, the number of
  unreachable resource names exceeds a documented maximum.
  - This maximum **must** be documented in the `unreachable` field comments
    directly.
  - This is independent of the `page_size` set by the caller.

#### Retaining previous behavior

Services **may** continue with previously implemented `unreachable` pagination
behavior where changing it would induce an incompatible change as per
[AIP-180][aip-180], but **must** document said behavior on the `unreachable`
field(s) directly.

[aip-180]: ./0180.md

### Adopting partial success

In order for an existing API that has a default behavior *differing* from the
aforementioned guidance i.e. the API call returns an error status instead of a
partial result, to adopt the `unreachable` pattern the API **must** do the
following:

- The default behavior **must** be retained to avoid incompatible behavioral
  changes
  - For example, if the default behavior is to return an error if any location
    is unreachable, that default behavior **must** be retained.
- The request message **must** have a `bool return_partial_success` field
- The response message **must** have the standard
  `repeated string unreachable` field
- The two aforementioned fields **must** be added simultaneously

When the `bool return_partial_success` field is set to `true` in a request, the
API **must** behave as described in the aforementioned guidance with regards to
populating the `repeated string unreachable` response field.

```proto
message ListBooksRequest {
  // Standard List request fields...

  // Setting this field to `true` will opt the request into returning the
  // resources that are reachable, and into including the names of those that
  // were unreachable in the [ListBooksResponse.unreachable] field. This can
  // only be `true` when reading across collections e.g. when `parent` is set to
  //  `"projects/example/locations/-"`.
  bool return_partial_success = 4;
}

message ListBooksResponse {
  // Standard List Response fields...

  // Unreachable resources. Populated when the request opts into
  // `return_partial_success` and reading across collections e.g. when
  // attempting to list all resources across all supported locations.
  repeated string unreachable = 3 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = UNORDERED_LIST
  ];
}
```

#### Partial success granularity

If the `bool return_partial_success` field is set to `true` in a request that is
scoped beyond the supported granualirty of the API's ability to reasonably
report unreachable resources, the API **should** return an `INVALID_ARGUMENT`
error with details explaining the issue. For example, if the API only supports
`return_partial_success` when [Reading Across Collections][aip159], it returns
an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error when given a request scoped to a specific parent
resource collection. The supported granularity **must** be documented on the
`return_partial_success` field.

## Rationale

### Using service-relative resource names

In general, relative resource names, as defined in AIP-122, are the best
practice for referring to resources by name _within_ a service and in other
services when that other service is obvious. The full resource name format is
strictly less consumable (e.g., requires extra parsing client side), and
over-specified for the uses of `unreachable`. Resource URIs are not transport
agnostic, as they are unusable in standard methods for gRPC users, and simple
resource IDs do not provide enough information about exactly which resource
was unreachable in a heterogenous list of resources.

### Minimizing extra error details in response

The context in which an unreachable resource is discovered may be sensitive and
the state of the system fluid between calls. As such, it is preferred to defer
to the service by making a more specific RPC to get more details about a
specific resource or parent. This allows the parent to handle all necessary RPC
checks and system state resolution on at time of request, rather than by
shoehorning potentially privileged or stale information into the broader list
call it was unreachable for.

### Unordered `unreachable` contents

It is important for broad API consistency that the contents of `unreachable` not
have a specific or order semantic structure. If each API baked a specific
ordering into a standard field, no single implementation, client or server side,
would be correct.

### Per page `unreachable` resources

Populating `unreachable` resources on a per page basis allows end users to
identify immediately when a page is incomplete, rather than _after_ paging
through all results. Paging to completion is not guaranteed, so it is important
to communicate as soon as possible when there are unreachable resource missing
from a given page. Furthermore, it allows users to identify when there is a
potential issue that they need to account for in subsequent calls. Finally,
retaining unreachable resources until the end of paging results requires
services to retain the state for what should be indepedent and fully isolated
API calls.

### Using request field to opt-in

Introducing a new request field as means of opting into the partial success
behavior is the best way to communicate user intent while keeping the 
default behavior backwards compatible. The alternative, changing the default
behavior with the introduction of the `unreachable` response field, presents
a backwards incompatible change. Users that previously expected failure when any
resource was unreachable, assume the successful response means all resources
are accounted for in the response.

### Introducing fields simultaneously

Introducing the request and response fields simultaneously is to prevent an
invalid intermediate state that is presented by only adding one or the other. If
only `unreachable` is added, then it could be assumed that it being empty means
all resources were returned when that may not be true. If only
`return_partial_success` is added, then the user wouldn't have a means of
knowing which resources were unreachable.

### Partial success granularity limitations

At a certain level of request scope granularity, an API is simply unable to
enumerate the resources that are unreachable. For example, global-only APIs may
be unable to provide granularity at a localized collection level. In such a
case, preemptively returning an error when `return_partial_success=true`
protects the user from the risks of the alternative - expecting unreachable
resources if there was an issue, but not getting any, thus falsely assuming
everything was retrieved. This aligns with guidance herein that suggests failing
requests that cannot be fulfilled preemptively.

## History

### Pagination guidance

The original guidance for how to populate the `unreachable` field revolved
around consuming the contents as if they were the paged results. This meant that
paged resources and unreachable resources couldn't be returned in the same
response i.e. page, and users needed to completely page through all results
in order to see if any were unreachable. See the Rationale section for the
reasoning around the changes.

## Further reading

- For listing across collections, see [AIP-159][].

## Changelog

- **2024-07-29**: Reformat guidance, add explicit resource name format
- **2024-07-26**: Change pagination guidance.
  requirement.
- **2024-07-19**: Add guidance for brownfield adoption of partial success.

[aip-159]: ./0159.md
