---
id: 235
state: approved
created: 2019-06-18
updated: 2022-06-02
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 230
---

# Batch methods: Delete

Some APIs need to allow users to delete a set of resources in a single
transaction. A batch delete method provides this functionality.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support Batch Delete using the following two patterns:

Returning the response synchronously

```proto
rpc BatchDeleteBooks(BatchDeleteBooksRequest) returns (google.protobuf.Empty) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:batchDelete"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

Returning an Operation which resolves to the response asynchronously

```proto
rpc BatchDeleteBooks(BatchDeleteBooksRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:batchDelete"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "BatchDeleteBooksOperationMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with `BatchDelete`. The remainder of the RPC
  name **should** be the plural form of the resource being deleted.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `Request` suffix.
- The response message **should** be `google.protobuf.Empty`.
  - If the resource is [soft deleted][soft-delete], the response message
    **should** be a response message containing the updated resources.
- If the batch method returns an `google.longrunning.Operation`, both the
  `response_type` and `metadata_type` fields **must** be specified.
  - If the resource is [soft deleted][soft-delete], the `response_type`
    **should** be a response message containing the updated resources.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST` (not `DELETE`).
- The HTTP URI **must** end with `:batchDelete`.
- The URI path **should** represent the collection for the resource, matching
  the collection used for simple CRUD operations. If the operation spans
  parents, a dash (`-`) **may** be accepted as a wildcard.
- The body clause in the `google.api.http` annotation **should** be `"*"`.

### Atomic vs. Partial Success

- The batch delete method **may** support atomic (all resources deleted or none
  are) or partial success behavior. To make a choice, consider the following
  factors:
  - **Complexity of Ensuring Atomicity:** Operations that are simple
    passthrough database transactions **should** use an atomic operation,
    while operations that manage complex resources **should** use partial
    success operations.
  - **End-User Experience:** Consider the perspective of the API consumer.
    Would atomic behavior be preferable for the given use case, even if it
    means that a large batch could fail due to issues with a single or a few
    entries?
- Synchronous batch delete **must** be atomic.
- Asynchronous batch delete **may** support atomic or partial success.
  - If supporting partial success, see
    [Operation metadata message](#operation-metadata-message) requirements.

### Request message

The request for a batch delete method **should** be specified with the
following pattern:

```proto
message BatchDeleteBooksRequest {
  // The parent resource shared by all books being deleted.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  // If this is set, the parent of all of the books specified in `names`
  // must match this field.
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The names of the books to delete.
  // A maximum of 1000 books can be deleted in a batch.
  // format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  repeated string names = 2 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];
}
```

- A `parent` field **should** be included, unless the resource being deleted is
  a top-level resource. If a caller sets this field, and the
  parent collection in the name of any resource being deleted does not match,
  the request **must** fail.
  - This field **should** be required if only 1 parent per request is allowed.
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-122-parent] that it
    references.
  - The comment for the field **should** document the resource pattern.
- The request message **must** include a repeated field which accepts the
  resource names specifying the resources to delete. The field **should** be
  named `names`.
  - The field **should** be required.
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-122-names] that it
    references.
  - The comment for the field **should** document the resource pattern.
- Other fields besides `name` **may** be "hoisted" from the [standard Delete
  request][request-message]. There is no way to allow for these fields to
  accept different values for different resources; if this is needed, use the
  [alternative request message form](#request-message-containing-standard-delete-request-messages).
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.
- The comment above the `names` field **should** document the maximum number of
  requests allowed.
- Filter-based matching **must not** be supported.

### Request message containing standard delete request messages

If the [standard Delete request message][request-message] contains a field
besides the resource name that needs to be different between different
resources being requested, the batch message **may** alternatively hold a
`repeated` field of the [standard Delete request message][request-message].
This is generally discouraged unless your use case really requires it.

The request for a batch delete method **should** be specified with the
following pattern:

```proto
message BatchDeleteBooksRequest {
  // The parent resource shared by all books being deleted.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  // If this is set, the parent of all of the books specified in the
  // DeleteBookRequest messages must match this field.
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // The requests specifying the books to delete.
  // A maximum of 1000 books can be deleted in a batch.
  repeated DeleteBookRequest requests = 2
    [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];
}
```

- A `parent` field **should** be included. If a caller sets this field, and the
  parent collection in the name of any resource being deleted does not match,
  the request **must** fail.
  - This field **should** be required if only 1 parent per request is allowed.
  - The field **should** identify the [resource type][aip-122-parent] that it
    references.
  - The comment for the field **should** document the resource pattern.
- The request message **must** include a repeated field which accepts the
  request messages specifying the resources to delete, as specified for
  [standard Delete methods][request-message]. The field **should** be named
  `requests`.
  - The field **should** be required.
- Other fields **may** be "hoisted" from the [standard Delete
  request][request-message], which means that the field can be set at either
  the batch level or child request level. Similar to `parent`, if both the
  batch level and child request level are set for the same field, the values
  **must** match.
  - Fields which must be unique cannot be hoisted (e.g. `etag`).
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.
- The comment above the `requests` field **should** document the maximum number
  of requests allowed.
- Filter-based matching **must not** be supported unless it is infeasible to
  support critical use cases without it, because it makes it too easy for users
  to accidentally delete important data. If it is unavoidable, see [AIP-165][].

### Response message (soft-delete only)

In the case where a response message is necessary because the resource is
soft-deleted, the response **should** be specified with the following pattern:

```proto
message BatchDeleteBooksResponse {
  // Books deleted.
  repeated Book books = 1;
}
```

- The response message **must** include one repeated field corresponding to the
  resources that were soft-deleted.

### Operation metadata message

- The `metadata_type` message **must** either match the RPC name with
  `OperationMetadata` suffix, or be named with `Batch` prefix and
  `OperationMetadata` suffix if the type is shared by multiple Batch methods.
- If batch delete method supports partial success, the metadata message **must**
  include a `map<int32, google.rpc.Status> failed_requests` field to communicate
  the partial failures.
  - The key in this map is the index of the request in the `requests` field in
    the batch request.
  - The value in each map entry **must** mirror the error(s) that would normally
    be returned by the singular Standard Delete method.
  - If a failed request can eventually succeed due to server side retries, such
    transient errors **must not** be communicated using `failed_requests`.
  - When all requests in the batch fail, `Operation.error` **must** be set with
    `code = google.rpc.Code.Aborted` and `message = "None of the requests
    succeeded, refer to the BatchDeleteBooksOperationMetadata.failed_requests
    for individual error details"`
- The metadata message **may** include other fields to communicate the
  operation progress.

### Adopting Partial Success

In order for an existing Batch API to adopt the partial success pattern, the API
must do the following:

- The default behavior must be retained to avoid incompatible behavioral
  changes.
- If the API returns an Operation:
  - The request message **must** have a `bool return_partial_success` field.
  - The Operation `metadata_type` **must** include a
    `map<int32, google.rpc.Status> failed_requests` field.
  - When the `bool return_partial_success` field is set to true in a request,
    the API should allow partial success behavior, otherwise it should continue
    with atomic behavior as default.
- If the API returns a direct response synchronously:
  - Since the existing clients will treat a success response as an atomic
    operation, the existing version of the API **must not** adopt the partial
    success pattern.
  - A new version **must** be created instead that returns an Operation and
    follows the partial success pattern described in this AIP.

## Rationale

### Restricting synchronous batch methods to be atomic

The restriction that synchronous batch methods must be atomic is a result of
the following considerations.

The previous iteration of this AIP recommended batch methods must be atomic.
There is no clear way to convey partial failure in a sync response status code
because an OK implies it all worked. Therefore, adding a new field to the
response to indicate partial failure would be a breaking change because the
existing clients would interpret an OK response as all resources created.

On the other hand, as described in [AIP-193](https://aip.dev/193), Operations
are more capable of presenting partial states. The response status code for an
Operation does not convey anything about the outcome of the underlying operation
and a client has to check the response body to determine if the operation was
successful.

### Communicating partial failures

The AIP recommends using a `map<int32, google.rpc.Status> failed_requests` field
to communicate partial failures, where the key is the index of the failed
request in the original batch request. The other options considered were:

- A `repeated google.rpc.Status` field. This was rejected because it is not
  clear which entry corresponds to which request.
- A `map<string, google.rpc.Status>` field, where the key is the request id of
  the failed request. This was rejected because:
  - Client will need to maintain a map of request_id -> request in order to use
    the partial success response.
  - Populating a request id for the purpose of communicating errors could
    conflict with [AIP-155](https://aip.dev/155) if the service can not
    guarantee idempotency for an individual request across multiple batch
    requests.
- A `repeated FailedRequest` field, where FailedRequest contains the individual
  create request and the `google.rpc.Status`. This was rejected because echoing
  the request payload back in response is discouraged due to additional
  challenges around user data sensitivity.

[aip-122-names]: ./0122.md#fields-representing-resource-names
[aip-122-parent]: ./0122.md#fields-representing-a-resources-parent
[aip-165]: ./0165.md
[request-message]: ./0135.md#request-message
[soft-delete]: ./0135.md#soft-delete

## Changelog

- **2025-03-06**: Changed recommendation to allow partial success, along with
  detailed guidance
- **2022-06-02:** Changed suffix descriptions to eliminate superfluous "-".
- **2020-09-16**: Suggested annotating `parent`, `names`, and `requests` fields.
- **2020-08-27**: Removed parent recommendations for top-level resources.
- **2020-03-27**: Added reference to AIP-165 for criteria-based deletion.
- **2019-10-11**: Changed the primary recommendation to specify a repeated
  string instead of a repeated standard Delete message. Moved the original
  recommendation into its own section.
- **2019-09-11**: Fixed the wording about which child field the `parent` field
  should match.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
