---
id: 236
state: approved
created: 2023-03-30
updated: 2023-03-30
placement:
  category: resource-design
  order: 240
---

# Policy preview

A policy is a resource that provides rules that admit or deny access to other
resources. Generally, the outcome of a policy can be evaluated to a specific set
of outcomes.

Changes to policies without proper validation may have unintended consequences
that can severely impact a customer’s overall infrastructure setup. To safely
update resources, it is beneficial to test these changes via policy rollout
APIs.

Preview is a rollout safety mechanism for policy resources, which gives the
customer the ability to validate the effect of their proposed changes against
production traffic prior to the changes going live. The result of the policy
evaluation against traffic is logged in order to give the customer the data
required to test the correctness of the change.

Firewall policies exemplify a case that is suitable for previewing. A new
configuration can be evaluated against traffic to observe which IPs would be
allowed or denied. This gives the customer the data to guide a decision on
whether to promote the proposed changes to live.

The expected flow for previewing a policy is as follows:

1. The user creates an experiment containing a new policy configuration
   intended to replace the live policy.
2. The user uses the "startPreview" method to start generating logs which compare
   the live and experiment policy evaluations against live traffic.
3. The user inspects the logs to determine whether the experiment has the
   intended result.
4. The user uses the "commit" method to promote the experiment to live.

## Guidance

### Non-goals

This proposal is for a safety mechanism for policy rollouts only. Safe rollouts
for non-policy resources are not in scope.

### Experiments

A new configuration of a policy to be previewed is stored as a nested collection
under the policy. These nested collections are known as experiments.

A hypothetical policy resource called, `Policy`, is used throughout. It has the
following resource name pattern:

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}`

The experimental versions of the resource used for previewing or other safe
rollout practices are represented as a nested collection under `Policy` using a
new resource type. The resource type **must** follow the naming convention
*RegularResourceType*`Experiment`.

The following pattern is used for the experiment collection:

`projects/{project}/locations/{location}/policies/{policy}/experiments/{experiment}`

A proto used to represent an experiment **must** contain the following:

  1. The required top-level fields for a resource, like `name` and `etag`
  2. The policy message that is being tested itself
  3. The field, `preview_metadata`, which contains metadata specific to
     previewing the experiment of a specific resource type.

```proto
message PolicyExperiment {

  // google.api.resource, name, and other annotations and fields

  // The policy experiment. This Policy will be used to preview the effects of
  // the change but will not affect live traffic.
  Policy policy = 2;

  // The metadata associated with this policy experiment.
  PolicyPreviewMetadata preview_metadata = 3
      [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];

  // Allows clients to store small amounts of arbitrary data.
  map<string, string> annotations = 4;
}
```

- The experiment proto **must** have a top-level field with the same type as the
  live policy.
  - It **must** be named as the live resource type. For example, if the
    experiment is for FirewallPolicy, then this field **must** be named
    `firewall_policy`.
  - The name inside the embedded `policy` message **must** be the name of the
    live policy.
- When the user is ready to promote an experiment, they **must** copy the
  `policy` message into the live policy and delete the experiment. This can be
  done manually or via a "commit" custom method.
- A product **may** support multiple experiments concurrently being previewed
  for a single live policy.
  - Each experiment must generate logs having each entry preceded by log_prefix
    so that the user can compare the results of the experiment with the behavior
    of the live policy.
  - The number of experimental configurations for a given live policy **may** be
    capped at a certain number and the cap **must** be documented.
- Cascading deletes **must** occur: if the live policy is deleted, all
  experiments **must** also be deleted.
- `map<string,string>` [annotations][aip-128-annotations] **must** allow clients
  to store small amounts of arbitrary data.

### Metadata

`preview_metadata` tracks all metadata of previewing the experiment. The
messages **must** follow the convention: *RegularResourceType*`PreviewMetadata`.
This is so the proto can be defined uniquely for each resource type in the
same service with experiments.

```proto
message PolicyPreviewMetadata {
  // Possible values of the state of previewing the experiment.
  enum State {
    // Default value. This value is unused.
    STATE_UNDEFINED = 0;

    // The experiment is actively previewing.
    ACTIVE = 1;

    // The previewing of the experiment has been stopped.
    SUSPENDED = 2;
  }

  // The state of previewing the experiment.
  State state = 1;

  // An identifying string common to all logs generated when previewing the
  // experiment. Searching all logs for this string will isolate the results.
  string log_prefix = 2;

  // The most recent time at which this experiment started previewing.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp start_time = 3;

  // The most recent time at which this experiment stopped previewing.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp stop_time = 4;
}
```

- `PolicyPreviewMetadata` **must** have the fields defined in the proto above.
  - It **may** have additional fields if the service or resource requires it.
- When an experiment is first previewed, `preview_metadata` **must** be
  absent.
  - It is present on the experiment once the "startPreview" method is used.
- All `preview_metadata` fields **must** be output only.
- `state` changes between `ACTIVE` and `SUSPENDED` when previewing is started
  or stopped. This happens when the "startPreview" or "stopPreview custom methods
  are invoked, respectively.
- The first time the "startPreview" custom method is used, the system **must**
  create `preview_metadata` and do the following:
  - It **must** set the `state` to `ACTIVE`
  - It **must** populate `start_time` with the current time.
    - `start_time` **must** be updated every time `state` is changed to
      `ACTIVE`.
  - It **must** set a system generated `log_prefix` string, which is a
    predefined constant hard coded by the system developers.
  - The same value is used for previewing experiments for the given resource
    type. For example, "FirewallPolicyPreviewLog" for FirewallPolicy.
- When the "stopPreview" custom method is used, the system **must** do the
  following:
  - It **must** set the `state` to `SUSPENDED`
  - It **must** populate the `stop_time` with the current time.

### Methods

#### create

- The resource **must** be created using long-running
  [Create][aip-133-long-running] and
  `google.longrunning.operation_info.response_type` **must** be
  `PolicyExperiment`.
- Creating a new experiment to preview **must** support the following use
cases:
  - Preview a new policy.
  - Preview an update to an already live policy.
  - Preview a deletion of a current policy.
- For the update and delete use cases, the `policy` field in the experiment
  **must** have the full payload of the live policy copied into it, including
  the name.
  - The user **must** set the rules to the new intended state to preview an
    update.
  - The user **must** set set the rules to represent a no-op to preview a
    delete.
- To preview a new policy, the system must do the following:
  - If the system does not support a nested collection without a live policy,
    the user **must** create a live policy and set the rules to represent a
    no-op. For example, the rules of a no-op policy **may** be empty.
    - An experiment is created as a child of the no-op policy.
- If the system supports previewing multiple experiments for a live policy,
  calling "create" more than once **must** create multiple experiments.

#### update

- The resource **must** be updated using long-running
  [Update][aip-134-long-running] and
  `google.longrunning.operation_info.response_type` **must** be
  `PolicyExperiment`.
- The name inside `policy` **must not** change but the other fields can in
  order to change the experiment being previewed because this `policy` is
  intended to replace the live policy, and the name of the live policy
  **must not** change.
- The system **must** set the `state` to `SUSPENDED` if the `state` was `ACTIVE`
  at the time of an update.
  - This is so the user can easily distinguish between different versions of
    the experiment being previewed.

#### get
- The standard method, [Get][aip-131], **must** be included for
  `PolicyExperiment` resource types.

#### list

- The standard method, [List][aip-132], **must** be included for
  `PolicyExperiment` resource types.
- Filtering on `PolicyPreviewMetadata` indicates which experiments are actively
  previewed.
  - For example, the following filter string returns a List response with
    experiments being previewed: preview_metadata.state = ACTIVE.

#### delete

- The resource **must** be deleted using long-running
  [Delete][aip-135-long-running] and
  `google.longrunning.operation_info.response_type` **must** be
  `PolicyExperiment`.

#### startPreview

```proto
// Starts previewing a PolicyExperiment. This triggers the system to start
// generating logs to evaluate the PolicyExperiment.
rpc StartPreviewPolicyExperiment(StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest)
    returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:startPreview"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "StartPreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

// The request message for the startPreview custom method.
message StartPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {
  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
}
```

- This custom method is required.
- `google.longrunning.Operation.metadata_type` **must** follow guidance on
  [Long-running operations][aip-151]
- This method **must** trigger the system to start generating logs to preview
  the experiment.
- Whenever the method is called successfully, the system **must** set the
  following values in the `PolicyPreviewMetadata`:
  - `log_prefix` to the predefined constant.
  - `start_time` to the current time
  - `state` to `ACTIVE`.
- If the method is called on an experiment with the rules representing a no-op,
  then the system **must** preview the deletion of the live policy.

#### stopPreview

```proto
// Stops previewing a PolicyExperiment. This triggers the system to stop
// generating logs to evaluate the PolicyExperiment.
rpc StopPreviewPolicyExperiment(StopPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest)
    returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:stopPreview"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PolicyExperiment"
    metadata_type: "StopPreviewPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

// The request message for the stopPreview custom method.
message StopPreviewPolicyExperimentRequest {
  // The name of the PolicyExperiment.
  string name = 1;
}
```

- This custom method is required.
- `google.longrunning.Operation.metadata_type` **must** follow guidance on
  [Long-running operations][aip-151]
- This method **must** trigger the system to stop generating logs to preview the
  experiment.
- Whenever the method is called successfully, the system **must** set the
  following values in the `PolicyPreviewMetadata`:
  - `stop_time` to the current time
  - `state` to `SUSPENDED`

#### commit

The resource **may** expose a new custom method called "commit" to promote an
experiment. The system copies `policy` from the experiment into the live policy
and then deletes the experiment.

Declarative clients **may** manually copy fields from an experiment into the
live policy and then delete the experiment rather than calling "commit" if
preferable.

```proto
// Commits a PolicyExperiment. This copies the PolicyExperiment's policy message
// to the live policy then deletes the PolicyExperiment.
rpc CommitPolicyExperiment(CommitPolicyExperimentRequest)
    returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=policies/*/experiments/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "google.protobuf.Empty"
    metadata_type: "CommitPolicyExperimentMetadata"
  };
}

// The request message for the commit custom method.
message CommitPolicyExperimentRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string etag = 2;
  string parent_etag = 3;
}
```

- `google.longrunning.Operation.metadata_type` **must** follow guidance on
  [Long-running operations][aip-151]
- The method **must** atomically copy `policy` from the experiment into the live
  policy, and then delete the experiment.
- If any experiment fails "commit", previewing it **must not** stop, and the
  live policy **must not** be updated.
- The method can be called on an experiment in any state.
- The `etag` **must** match that of the experiment in order for commit to be
  successful. This is so the user does not commit an unintended version of the
  experiment.
  - If no `etag` is provided, the API **must not** succeed to prevent the user
    from unintentionally committing a different version of the experiment as
    intended.
  - A `parent_etag` **may** be provided to guarantee that the experiment
    overwrites a specific version of the live policy.
- The method is not idempotent and calling it twice on the same experiment
  **must** return a 404 NOT_FOUND as the experiment is deleted as part of the
  first call.

### Changes to live policy API methods

#### delete

- A delete of the live policy **must** delete all experiments.
- To maintain the experiments while negating the effect of the live policy, the
  live policy **must** be changed to a no-op policy instead of using this
  method.

### Logging

Logging is crucial for the user to evaluate whether an experiment should be
promoted to live.

Logs **must** contain the results of the evaluated experiment, the `etag`
associated with that experiment alongside that of the live policy, and be
preceded by the value of `log_prefix`.
  - The `etag` fields help the user identify which
    configurations of the live and experiment are evaluated in the log.
  - `log_prefix` helps the user separate logs specifically generated for
    previewing the experiment from other use cases.

Overall, these logs help the user make a decision about whether to promote the
experiment to live.

## Changelog

- **2023-04-27:** Methods for start and stop renamed. State to enum. Annotations
  added.
- **2023-03-30:** Initial AIP written.

[aip-128-annotations]: https://aip.dev/128#annotations
[aip-131]: https://aip.dev/131
[aip-132]: https://aip.dev/132
[aip-133-long-running]: https://aip.dev/133#long-running-create
[aip-134-long-running]: https://aip.dev/134#long-running-update
[aip-135-long-running]: https://aip.dev/135#long-running-delete
[aip-151]: https://google.aip.dev/151
