---
id: 250
state: draft
created: 2020-09-17
placement:
  category: fields
---

# Short names

System-generated identifiers have many benefits, but are not easy for humans
use.

## Guidance

Resources with system-generated identifiers **may** support a field
`short_name` of type string, which **must** refer to a terse, human-friendly
value which uniquely identifies a resource of a specific type within a
namespace.

* `short_name` **must** have clear documentation for its namespace.

* `short_name` **must** support at least the character set of
  `/^[a-z][a-z0-9.-]+[a-z0-9]$/` (lowercase
  [RFC-1034](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1034)).

* `short_name` **must** have a maximum length of no less than 30 characters.

* `short_name` **should** be immutable, which is safer for references in
  configuration files.

### Usage

To illustrate this concept, let us imagine a bookstore that uses a
config-as-code system to manage which books are to be on sale each week.

```proto
message Book {
  // The resource name of the book.
  // Example: publishers/1235/books/6789
  string name = 1;

  // A short identifier for human use in the namespace of the publisher.
  // Example: mary-poppins
  string short_name = 2;

  // The title of the book.
  // Example: "Mary Poppins"
  sting title = 3;
}
```

```yaml
- week_start: 2020-09-13
  books_on_sale:
    - book: publishers/1235/books/6789
      price: $5.99
    - book: publishers/2342/books/9827
      price: $25.99
```

While this configuration is clear to machines, the human reader is at a loss for
what is on sale. Tooling can choose to support `short_name` as follows:

```yaml
- week_start: 2020-09-13
  books_on_sale:
    - book: 1235/mary-poppins
      price: $5.99
    - book: 2342/thing-explainer
      price: $25.99
```

Now the configuration is much more understandable to humans.

The tooling knows that "1235/mary-poppins" is a reference to a book which will
be formatted as `<publisher_id>/<book.short_name>`. Using the list method of the
Books API
(`ListBooks(parent="publishers/2345", filter="short_name:mary-poppins")`), the
reference can be resolved to "publishers/1235/books/6789".

Use of the `short_name` may also be appropriate in reporting scenarios, where
tooling can find strings like "publishers/1235/books/6789" and replace them
with "1235/mary-poppins" in contexts where a human is reading the output.

### Context & Namespace

`short_name` requires tools understand the context of the reference and the
namespace in which the `short_name` is unique. The namespace **should** be based
on an immutable property of the resource (eg,. its parent or an unchangeable
portion of its ancestry).

In the example above, the context is a reference to a Book, and the namespace
is the publisher identifier.

The namespace itself may utilize short names. For example, a database table in a
project could be referenced as `projects/123/databases/456/table/789` or
`123/wholesaler-db/books`.

### Use in API calls

Services **should not** allow `short_name` to be used in place of the
system-generated identifier in API calls. This practice is discouraged as it
creates confusion about which is the canonical name for a resource. Such
confusion hampers interoperability between systems which are unable to reliably
join data on a resource name.

## Changelog

* **2020-09-17**: Initial draft guidance for the `short_name` field.
