---
id: 4111
scope: auth
state: approved
created: 2020-07-23
---

# Self-signed JWT

Self-signed JWT (JSON Web Token) for Google APIs was introduced in 2014 to
provide a more efficient auth stack for Cloud APIs being accessed via service
accounts by bypassing the intermediate step of exchanging client assertions for
OAuth tokens. A self-signed JWT is a spec-conforming JWT that is locally signed
by the service account private key. Since many Cloud APIs accept self-signed JWT
in place of traditional access tokens, it is now considered a standard
authentication method.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

This section describes the general guidance of supporting self-signed
JWT as a means of authentication.

### Application Default Credentials

Supporting self-signed JWT is considered a part of [application default
credentials][0]. To understand the overall flow, please read [AIP-4110][0].

### Scope vs. Audience

In the past, the self-signed JWT was only applicable with `audience`. Recently,
the usage of the "scope" claim in self-signed JWTs is now allowed in the Google
Cloud auth ecosystem, which makes the self-signed JWT usable with both audience
and scope. However, caller **must** not specify scope and audience at the same
time to prevent potential conflicts.

#### Opt-in Strategy

Currently, this scope support for JWT is gated behind a configurable boolean
option `UseJWTAccessWithScope`(the actual naming may vary depending on the
programming language), as the feature is not supported for all Cloud API service
backends. The default value of this boolean is false, and to use scope with
self-signed JWT, caller **must** specify this option as `true`. Otherwise the
OAuth exchange flow **should** be used instead when scope is provided. The API
clients **should** try to automatically determine this option with the
appropriate value based on the APIs, so this complexity is not exposed to the
upper-layer developer.

### Default Authentication Method For Service Account Keys

Considering its better efficiency and reliability comparing with OAuth flow
(bypassing the exchanging step), [ADC][0] **should** use self-signed JWT as the
default authentication flow when service account key is provided as the source
credential.

In other words, [ADC][0] **should** choose the OAuth flow over the self-signed
JWT flow only if scope is provided and JWT is not enabled via
`UseJWTAccessWithScope`.

### Expected Behavior

To support self-signed JWT, the auth libraries **must** follow the steps below:

1\. Load the [service account ID JSON file][2]. Please note that the self-signed
JWT only supports service account ID credential type.

2\. Using any standard JWT library, such as one found at [jwt.io][1], create a JWT
with a header and payload like the following examples:

(1) Example of using audience:

```json
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "kid": "abcdef1234567890"
}
{
  "iss": "123456-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com",
  "sub": "123456-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com",
  "aud": "https://pubsub.googleapis.com/",
  "iat": 1511900000,
  "exp": 1511903600
}
```

(2) Example of using scope:

```json
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "kid": "abcdef1234567890"
}
{
  "iss": "123456-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com",
  "sub": "123456-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com",
  "scope": "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform",
  "iat": 1511900000,
  "exp": 1511903600
}
```

* For the `kid` field in the header, specify the service account's private key
ID. You can find this value in the `private_key_id` field of the service account
JSON file.

* For the `iss` and `sub` fields, specify the service account's email address.
You can find this value in the `client_email` field of the service account JSON
file.

* For the `aud` field, specify the audience. The default audience value
**should** be `https://[SERVICE]/`. (e.g. `https://pubsub.googleapis.com/`)

* For the `scope` field, specify the scope. Please note that `aud` and `scope`
cannot be specified at the same time.

* For the `iat` field, specify the current Unix time, and for the `exp` field,
the value **must** be exactly 3600 seconds later, when the JWT will expire.

3\. Sign the JWT with RSA-256 using the private key found in the service
account JSON file.

## Changelog

- **2019-08-13**: Add a section for application default credential.
- **2021-06-02**: Update scope support.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4110
[1]: https://jwt.io/#libraries-io
[2]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4112
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
