---
id: 4112
scope: auth
state: approved
created: 2020-08-13
---

# Default Credentials From Google Virtual Machines

If the client runs on Google virtual machine instance such as [Google App Engine][0] or [Compute Engine][1], the auth library **may** obtain the identity token that is associated with the instance, and use the identity token as the credential to access Google APIs. By using the instance identity, the users no longer to config their credentials explicitly.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

This section describes the general guidance of supporting default credentials from Google virtual machine environments.

### Application Default Credentials

Supporting the default credentials from Google virtual machines is considered as
a part of the [Application Default Credential][2]. To understand the overall credential flow, please read [AIP-4110][2].

### Google Virtual Machine Environments

There are typically two types of Google virtual machine environments where the auth library should obtain the identity token based on the environment type:

- Google App Engine Standard 1.0
- Compute Engine or equivalent runtime
  - This typically includes Google App Engine Standard 2.0+ and Google App Engine Flex environments.

The auth library **should** depend on the [Google App Engine SDK][3] to detect if the application is running within a Google App Engine environment.

To detect if the application is running on Compute Engine environment, the auth library **should** depend on the [Metadata Service Library][4].

### Compute Engine or equivalent Runtime

If the application runs on a Compute Engine instance (or equivalent runtime), the auth library can request the following URL to get an access token associated with instance:

```
http://metadata.google.internal/computeMetadata/v1/instance/service-accounts/default/token
```

In response, the auth library will usually receive a token in the following JSON format:

```json
{
      "access_token":"YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN",
      "expires_in":3599,
      "token_type":"Bearer"
 }
```

**Note:** You can use the access token only for scopes that you specified when you created the instance. For example, if the instance has been granted only the https://www.googleapis.com/auth/storage-full scope for Cloud Storage, then it can't use the access token to make a request to BigQuery.

### Google App Engine Standard 1.0 Runtime

If the application runs on a App Engine Standard 1st generation instance, the auth library **should** rely on the [Google App Engine SDK][3] to retrieve the access token. Here is [one example][5] in Go. Essentially the SDK relies on the underlying App Engine Identity service to generate the token.

Unlike Compute Engine, the auth library can specify scopes when requesting the token in the App Engine Standard 1.0 runtime.

Sample code of getting the access token in Go:

```go
import "google.golang.org/appengine"
...
token, exp, err := appengine.AccessToken(context, scopes...)
...
```

### Token Expiration

The access tokens expire after a short period of time. The auth library **must** get a new token if the existing token expires.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://cloud.google.com/appengine
[1]: https://cloud.google.com/compute
[2]: ./4110
[3]: https://cloud.google.com/appengine/downloads
[4]: https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/reporting/metadata/v3/libraries
[5]: https://godoc.org/google.golang.org/appengine#AccessToken
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
