---
id: 4113
scope: auth
state: approved
created: 2020-07-31
---

# gcloud CLI Integration

[gcloud][0] is the CLI that manages authentication, local configuration,
developer workflow, and interactions with the Google Cloud Platform (GCP) APIs.
gcloud can generate default credentials by obtaining user access credentials
via 3-legged OAuth (3LO) web flow and saving them to well-known locations in
JSON format. These credentials are intended to be consumed by applications
other than gcloud. [Application Default Credentials (ADC) and Google Unified
Auth Clients (GUAC)][1] **must** support this type of gcloud default
credentials. [gcloud][0] can also generate impersonated service account
credentials using the ‘--impersonate-service-account’ flag where the user
credentials obtained from the 3LO flow impersonate the service account
specified in the flag. [Application Default Credentials (ADC) and Google
Unified Auth Clients (GUAC)][1] **may** support this type of gcloud default
credentials.

**Note:** Although the sample code is written in Python, this AIP describes
guidance and requirements in a language-neutral way. It uses generic
terminology which may be imprecise or inappropriate in certain languages or
environments.

## Guidance

This section describes the general guidance of supporting the gcloud default
credentials.

### Credentials Generation

gcloud default credentials can be generated via command [gcloud auth
application-default login][2].

```
$ gcloud auth application-default login
```

The generated credentials are saved to well-known locations which vary as
platforms:

- **Linux, Mac**: \$HOME/.config/gcloud/application_default_credentials.json
- **Windows**: %APPDATA%/gcloud/application_default_credentials.json

Below is an example of the gcloud default credentials,

```json
{
  "client_id": "fake_id.apps.googleusercontent.com",
  "client_secret": "fake_secret",
  "quota_project_id": "fake_project",
  "refresh_token": "fake_token",
  "type": "authorized_user"
}
```

All the fields are populated by the login response from the Google
authorization backend except for ‘quota_project_id’ which is retrieved from
gcloud’s context. Additionally, the users can override ‘quota_project_id’ with
the ‘--client-id-file’ flag,

```
$ gcloud auth application-default login --client-id-file=clientid.json
```

Users can specify the ‘--impersonate-service-account’ flag to create a json
containing impersonated service account credentials,

```
$ gcloud auth application-default login --impersonate-service-account=sa@myproject.iam.gserviceaccount.com
```

Below is an example of gcloud default credentials created by the above command,

```json
{
  "delegates": [],
  "quota_project_id": "fake_project",
  "service_account_impersonation_url": "https://iamcredentials.googleapis.com/v1/projects/-/serviceAccounts/sa@myproject.iam.gserviceaccount.com:generateAccessToken",
  "source_credentials": {
    "client_id": "fake_id.apps.googleusercontent.com",
    "client_secret": "fake_secret",
    "refresh_token": "fake_token",
    "type": "authorized_user"
  },
  "type": "impersonated_service_account"
}
```

If multiple service accounts, separated with comma, are specified in
‘--impersonate-service-account’, the last service account in the list is the
target principal to impersonate. All other service accounts are delegates. For
more information about the ‘--impersonate-service-account’ flag, please read
the help text of [gcloud][0]. For more information about service account
impersonation, please read the **TODO(silvano@ will submit his PR)**.

### Expected Behaviors

The auth libraries will use the information in the gcloud default credentials
to exchange access tokens with Google authorization backend. The resulting
access tokens will be further used by applications to call GCP APIs.

The auth libraries and applications **must** follow the steps below when the
gcloud default credentials are uesr credentials:

- The auth library loads the gcloud default credentials from the well-known
  location (see previous [section](#credentials-generation)) of the platform on
  which it runs.

- The auth library calls Google authorization backend with the refresh token,
  client ID and client secret in the gcloud default credentials and procures an
  access token. The URL for acquiring access tokens from Google authorization
  backend is https://oauth2.googleapis.com/token. Below is an example code with
  [google-auth][3] as the auth library and [urllib3][4] as the http transport.

```python
from google.oauth2 import _client as google_auth_client
import google.auth.transport.urllib3 as google_auth_urllib3
import urllib3

# Create an http transport for communicating with Google authorization backend.
http = urllib3.PoolManager()
request = google_auth_urllib3.Request(http)

# Build parameters for the access token request. Assume the gcloud default
# credentials are deserialized are into a dictionary ‘gcloud_default’
# in the previous step.
token_uri = 'https://oauth2.googleapis.com/token'
refresh_token = gcloud_default['refresh_token']
client_id = gcloud_default['client_id']
client_secret = gcloud_default['client_secret']
scopes = ['https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform']

# Obtain an access token.
access_token, _, _, _ = google_auth_client.refresh_grant(
	request, token_uri, refresh_token, client_id, client_secret, scopes)
```

- The application calls GCP API with the access token obtained from the
  previous step. ‘project_project_id’ in the gcloud default credentials
  **should** be added to the ‘X-Goog-User-Project’ http header so that the
  associated account will be charged for billing and quota.

When gcloud default credentials are impersonated service account credentials,
after acquiring access tokens of the user credentials, auth library and
applications **should** call [IAM APIs][5] to request a short-lived access
token of the impersonated service account. The access token of the impersonated
service account **should** be used to authenticate the request to GCP APIs.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference
[1]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4110
[2]: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/application-default/login
[3]: https://google-auth.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
[4]: https://urllib3.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
[5]: https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/reference/credentials/rest/v1/projects.serviceAccounts/generateAccessToken
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
