---
id: 4114
scope: auth
state: approved
created: 2020-07-28
---

# Device Certificate Authentication via Mutual TLS

Mutual TLS (a.k.a mTLS) authentication enables authentication of both client and
server endpoints in a TLS handshake, and offers the solution to enable Context
Aware Access for GCP enterprise customers. With Context Aware Access, the
transport context considers the client certificate’s state in the transport
(TLS) to make authorization decisions. The use of client certificates provides a
stronger indication of the access originating from a trusted device. This allows
customers to restrict access from untrusted devices.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

This section describes the general guidance of supporting Device Certificate
Authentication (a.k.a DCA) via mTLS.

### Application Default Credentials for DCA

Users **should** enable DCA through [ADC][0] instead of manual configuration via
client options.

There are two aspects of ADC for DCA. The first is the automatic procurement of
a device certificate. The second is the automatic switching of the service
endpoint to the mTLS version of the service endpoint. Clients **must** support
both of these aspects when supporting ADC for DCA.

### Expected Behavior

Client support for DCA **must** give priority to user overrides specified via
client options. The following decision tree **should** be used:

1.  If user specifies both device certificate and endpoint override via client
    options, use them as is.
1.  If user does not specify device certificate, attempt to procure and use
    a default device certificate.
1.  If user does not specify endpoint override, use the default mTLS endpoint if
    a device certificate is available and the default regular endpoint otherwise.

Implications of the above logic:

1.  If user specifies a non-mTLS endpoint override but a device certificate is
    available, pass along the certificate anyway and let the server decide what
    to do.
1.  If user specifies an mTLS endpoint override but device certificate is not
    available, do not fail-fast, but let server return error when connecting.

The above behavior avoids introducing client-side logic that parses whether the
endpoint override is an mTLS url, since the url pattern may change at anytime.

### Obtaining the Default mTLS Endpoint

The default mTLS endpoint for a service **should** be read from the Discovery
Document field **"mtlsRootUrl"** instead of generated via regex patterns.

### Obtaining the Default Device Certificate

The default device certicate **should** be procured using the
[EndpointVerification][1] workflow, which fetches the certificate from a
platform-specific credential store (ex. KeyChain in macOS) via a native helper.

Exporting the certificate via the native helper involves executing a **"cert
provider command"** specified in a well-known gcloud metadata file of the
following format:

```json
{
   "version": 1
   "min_cloud_sdk_version": "240.0.0"
   "has_client_cert": true
   "endpoint_verification_error": ""
   "cert_provider_command": "[absolute_path_to_provider_command] --fetch_client_cert"
}
```

For Linux and macOS platforms, the above metadata file is located at
**"~/.secureConnect/context_aware_metadata.json"**.

The cert provider command will print the certificate to stdout, which will be in
the form of an X.509 cert followed immediately by the private key:

  -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
  Common Name: Google Endpoint Verification
  Valid From: November 10, 2019
  Valid To: November 10, 2020
  Serial Number: 4921083229008411918 (0x444b331faf2dbd0e)
  ...
  -----END CERTIFICATE-----
  -----BEGIN PRIVATE KEY-----
  ...
  -----END PRIVATE KEY-----

### Environment Variables

There are situations where the ADC for DCA behavior needs to be modified, such
as for integration testing, or for failsafe. To accomodate those scenarios, the
following environment variables **should** be supported.

**GOOGLE_API_USE_MTLS_ENDPOINT**: If **"always"**, always use mTLS endpoint. If
**"never"**, always use regular endpoint. If **"auto"**, use the default
behavior, which is to use the mTLS endpoint if a device certificate is
available. The default value of this environment variable will be "auto".

**GOOGLE_API_USE_CLIENT_CERTIFICATE**: If **"true"**, device certificate
authentication will be supported as described in the general guidance. If
**"false"**, the device certificate **must** not be used, even if specified by
the user. For now, the default value will be "false", since mTLS support is not
yet fully adopted by all services. Users who wish to enable DCA feature **must**
explicitly set this environment variable to "true". In the future, the default
value will be "true' to allow a more secure connection to be established
whenever possible.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4110
[1]: https://cloud.google.com/endpoint-verification/docs/overview
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
