---
id: 4115
scope: auth
state: approved
created: 2020-08-13
---

# Default Credentials For Google Cloud Virtual Environments

If the client runs on Google cloud compute environments such as [Google Compute
Engine (GCE)][0], [Serverless][1], or [Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)][2],
absent any explicit configuration the auth library will follow the Application
Default Credentials flow described in AIP-4110.  It will detect that it is
running on a platform with an available metadata server API, and configure
itself to retrieve workload credentials from the metadata server.

Typically, these workload credentials will be Google oauth access tokens, which
are opaque tokens (only decodable by Google) that start with the fixed string
`ya29.`.  Depending on the configuration of the workload and the Google service
being called, the auth library may use additional features supported on the
metadata server, such as mTLS-bound access tokens.

This AIP describes how to:

1. Retrieve and cache workload access tokens from the metadata server.
2. Retrieve mTLS-specific configuration from the metadata server
3. Request mTLS-bound access tokens from the metadata server.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

### Metadata Server API

The metadata server is a special API that your workload can access using the
special hostname `metadata.google.internal`.  This special hostname is
configured to resolve to the address `169.254.169.254` across all GCP
compute environments.

The metadata server serves an HTTP API.  The precise set of paths available on
this API is platform-specific, but the main paths used for authenticating to
Google APIs are

#### Workload Access Token

The access token endpoint returns an opaque access token that can be used as a
bearer token to authenticate to Google APIs.

Request: `GET
http://169.254.169.254/computeMetadata/v1/instance/service-accounts/default/token`

Response: A JSON object with the following keys:
* `access_token` (String): The access token.
* `expires_in` (Number): The number of seconds until the token expires.
* `token_type` (String): Always the static string `Bearer`.

#### Workload Identity Token

The identity token endpoint returns a JWT asserting the workload's identity in a
way that can be verified by non-Google third parties.  Third parties that you
present the token to will expect a specific audience set on the token.

Request: `GET
http://169.254.169.254/computeMetadata/v1/instance/service-accounts/default/identity`.
Accepts the following query parameters:
* `audience` (Required): The audience for which this token should be issued.
* `format` (Optional): `full`, or `standard`.  Only understood on GCE.
* `licenses`: (Optional): `TRUE` or `FALSE`.  Only understood on GCE. 

Response: A JSON Web Token, no additional framing.

Note that the claims in the JWT can vary based on which compute platform you are
using:
* On GCE, the returned JWT is the [VM Identity Token](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/verifying-instance-identity).
* On GKE:
  * When Workload Identity Federation for GKE is disabled, your workload talks
    to the underlying GCE metadata server, so the behavior is the same as the
    GCE case.
  * When Workload Identity Federation for GKE is enabled, and the pod is not
    configured with service account impersonation (the default), the identity
    token endpoint always returns an error.
  * When Workload Identity Federation for GKE is enabled, and the pod is
    configured with service account impersonation, the identity token endpoint
    returns a JWT as issued by
    [generateIdToken](https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/reference/credentials/rest/v1/projects.serviceAccounts/generateIdToken)
    for the Google service account being impersonated.

### Retrieve and Cache Workload Access Tokens

When retrieving workload access tokens from the metadata server on GCE, GKE, App
Engine, or other GCP compute platforms, the following recommendations apply.
Google-provided auth libraries adhere to these recommendations.  If your
workload directly communicates with the metadata server in order to retrieve
workload access tokens, you should adhere to these recommendations.  If you do
not, your workload may suffer from intermittent and difficult-to-debug
authentication errors.

**Cache the access token in memory:** Your workload should not make a call to
the metadata server every time you make a call to a GCP API.  Doing so will
cause your workload to be rate-limited by the metadata server, or GCP IAM.
Instead, you should maintain an in-memory cache of the access token, and use the
cached token across all of your outbound requests.

**Use a robust refresh strategy:**  Each time you attempt to use the cached
access token, check the remaining lifetime of the token.
* If it is greater than 225 seconds, the token is fresh.  Proceed to use it.
* If it is less than 0 seconds, then the token is expired.  Refresh the cached
  token, then proceed with the current thread.
* If it is less than 225 seconds, but more than 0 seconds, then the token is
  stale.  You can handle the current thread in one of two ways:
  * (Background Refresh) If the token has greater than two minutes of validity
    remaining, you can refresh the cached token in the background, allowing the
    current thread to immediately proceed with the stale token, OR
  * (Blocking Refresh) Refresh the cached token, blocking the current thread
    until the refresh is complete.

It is not safe to refresh the cached access token in the background on a
schedule without additionally checking the status of the token before using it
to make a request. Clock skew between your workload and the metadata server may
result in your background refresh attempt still receiving a stale access token.

Note that the access token returned by the metadata server may itself be stale.
Certain implementations of the metadata server use the "Background Refresh"
strategy described above for managing their own internal caches of tokens.  For
example, when running on GKE with Workload Identity Federation for GKE enabled,
gke-metadata-server will not reliably return a refreshed access token until 120
seconds before the token expires.  As long as your workload follows the robust
refresh strategy described above, this will not cause problems.

**Limit concurrency in initial fill and refresh of the cached token:** Use a
single-flight mechanism, or locking, to ensure that your workload only makes a
single concurrent call to the metadata server to retrieve the access token, no
matter how many threads or coroutines might have triggered the refresh.  This
ensures that your workload won't accidentally get rate-limited by the metadata
server when your workload is under high load.

### mTLS and Bound Tokens

mTLS authentication enables authentication of both client and server identities
in a TLS handshake. Applications running in Google virtual environments can
authenticate to Google APIs using X.509 SPIFFE Verifiable Identity Documents
(SVIDs). These SVIDs are X.509 certificates that contain SPIFFE IDs specifying
the identity of the certificate owner.

Bound tokens are access tokens that are bound to some property of the
credentials used to establish the mTLS connection. The advantage of bound tokens
is that they can be used over secure channels established via mTLS credentials
with the correct binding information, when appropriate access policies have been
put in place. Therefore, using bound tokens is more secure than bearer tokens,
which can be stolen and adversarially replayed.

### Access Default mTLS Credentials

**Note:** Before trying to use Google’s default mTLS credentials, the client **must** first check if the remote 
Google API endpoint supports mTLS. If the remote endpoint does NOT support mTLS, the client **should** 
connect to the endpoint using TLS. How to check if an endpoint supports mTLS is out of the scope of this 
AIP. If the remote endpoint does support mTLS, the client **should** try to connect using mTLS first 
before falling back to TLS. How to find the remote API’s mTLS endpoint is out of the scope of this AIP.
If users enabled [Device Certificate Authentication (DCA)](4), the client **should** give priority to DCA
as mTLS credentials.

To leverage Google’s default mTLS credentials, the client **should** retrieve configurations from 
MDS. The MDS in all virtual environments (GCE, Serverless, and GKE) exposes an HTTP endpoint that 
serves a configuration that specifies how to access Google's default mTLS credentials. This endpoint 
is called the mTLS configuration endpoint.

The URL of the MDS's mTLS configuration endpoint is: 
```
http://metadata.google.internal/computeMetadata/v1/instance/platform-security/auto-mtls-configuration
```

The request to the MDS's mTLS configuration endpoint **should** be an HTTP GET request without any 
parameter or payload.

The response from the MDS's mTLS configuration endpoint **should** contain the following 
information:

* The **Secure Session Agent** address: the client doesn’t have direct access to mTLS credentials. 
  The Secure Session Agent manages default mTLS credentials. The client can only use mTLS 
  credentials through the Secure Session Agent. The address can be an IP:port address or a file path 
  representing a Unix Domain Socket (UDS).

The client **must** follow the steps below to access Google’s default mTLS credentials.

1. Check if the remote endpoint supports mTLS. 
   * If yes, go to step (2).
   * If not, go to step (3). 
2. Send a request to the MDS's mTLS configuration endpoint. If the request is successful and the 
   response contains a Secure Session Agent address, use the address to access Google's default mTLS
   credentials, and go to step (4). If the request fails or the response contains an empty address,
   go to step (3).
3. Fall back to TLS [END].
4. Configure the TLS library to use the Secure Session Agent ([example][3]) for client authentication
   during the mTLS handshake.

### Request Bound Tokens

To access Google APIs with bound tokens, the client **should** request tokens from MDS. The MDS in 
all virtual environments (GCE, Serverless, and GKE) exposes an HTTP endpoint that serves access tokens.
This endpoint is called the access token endpoint.

The URL of the MDS's access token endpoint is: 
```
http://metadata.google.internal/computeMetadata/v1/instance/service-accounts/default/token
```

The request to the MDS's access token endpoint **should** be an HTTP GET request. The request **may**
have a “scopes” URL parameter with a list of comma-separated scopes. The auth library **should** allow
the caller to optionally specify a list of custom scopes, and add the “scopes” parameter to the request 
when needed. Depending on the runtime environment, the request for custom scopes **may** be transparently 
ignored or fulfilled by the server.

The response from the MDS's access token endpoint **should** contain an access token in the following 
JSON format:

```json
{
      "access_token": "YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN",
      "expires_in": 3599,
      "token_type": "Bearer"
 }
```

The client **must** follow the steps below to request new access tokens for Google APIs if existing 
tokens expire.

1. Send an HTTP request to the MDS access token endpoint, retrieve the access token from the response 
   and go to step (2).
2. Attach the token from step (1) to the request to Google APIs.

## Changelog

- **2020-12-14**: Replace note on scopes with more detailed discussion.
- **2021-07-13**: Clarify GCE equivalent runtimes
- **2023-02-16**: Add mTLS configuration endpoint and unify the token binding flow.
- **2025-01-09**: Describe how to retrieve and cache standard access tokens.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://cloud.google.com/compute
[1]: https://cloud.google.com/serverless
[2]: https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine
[3]: https://github.com/google/s2a-go/tree/main/example
[4]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4114
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
