---
id: 4116
scope: auth
state: draft
created: 2021-01-06
---

# Identity Tokens

Identity Tokens (or ID Tokens) are JSON Web Tokens (JWT) with additional claims pertaining to the identity of the client or end-user (such as "email").  Which additional claims fields are included in the ID token are dependent on the ID
token provider.

The **fetching** of ID tokens is used to:

 * request a [protected Cloud Run service][0], which requires a valid ID token in the `Authentication` header.
 * request an [IAP-protected resource][2], which requires a valid ID token in the `Authentication` header.

The **validation** of ID tokens should be done by:

 * services receiving an [authenticated PubSub push message][1] sent outside of Google Cloud.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

This section describes the general guidance of ID tokens as a means of
authentication.

### ID tokens obtained by Application Default Credentials

When a target audience is provided by the developer, [ADC][3] **should** fetch
an ID token with the credentials provided. For example, if service account keys
are provided, ADC will request an ID token from the OAuth token endpoint. If
[virtual machine credentials][4] are provided, ADC will request an ID token from
the virtual machine server.

### Expected Behavior for Fetching ID Tokens

To support fetching ID Tokens, the auth libraries **must** follow the steps
below:

1\. Accept a target audience parameter when Application Default Credentials
are requested. If a target audience and scope are both provided to the auth library, an exception **must** be thrown.

2\. Virtual machine credentials return the ID token retrieved from the metadata
server's `instance/service-accounts/default/identity` endpoint, setting the
`audience` querystring parameter to the provided target audience.

3\. Service account Keys use the [JWT Bearer][5] grant type, and set the
`target_audience` claim to the provided target audience. This will return a JSON
object containing an `id_token` key.

User Identity flows may be used to issue ID tokens, but are not required to.

### Expected Behavior for Verifying ID Tokens

To support verifying ID Tokens, the auth libraries **must** provide a method to
validate a JWT token which can do the following:

1\. Validate a JWT with an ES256 signature.
2\. Validate JWT `aud` claim against a user-provided audience.
3\. Validate JWT `exp` claim against the current timestamp.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://cloud.google.com/run/docs/authenticating/service-to-service
[1]: https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/push#setting_up_for_push_authentication
[2]: https://cloud.google.com/iap/docs/signed-headers-howto#securing_iap_headers
[3]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4110
[4]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4115
[5]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7523
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
