---
id: 4117
scope: auth
state: draft
created: 2021-01-06
---

# Google Unified Auth Clients (GUAC)

"Google Universal Authentication Clients (also known as GUAC)" is a initiative
that provides a unified future-proof solution for client authentication to
access Google APIs. More specifically, GUAC initiative aims to continuously
modernize client authentication with an expanding set of Auth AIPs.

## Google Client Authentication

Google publishes hundreds of external APIs and most developers rely on Google's
clients or toolings to access these APIs. To access a Google API, the client
**must** identify the application to the server, and if the API requires
authentication, the client **must** also identify the principal running the
application. The functionalities in clients that offer such identification is
considered as Google client authentication methods, and each method requires
some form of credentials or certificates.

In today’s world, with the increasing demand of authentication requirements from
our customers, the authentication has evolved rapidly for our clients and
tooling. These evolvements have increased the complexities significantly in
the space, and thus introduced several new challenges such as scalability and
consistency. GUAC is the initiative that aims to solve these new challenges,
reduce the noise in the client authentication space, and deliver the best
developer experience for our customers.

## GUAC Vision

GUAC aims to provide the following improvements for Google client
authentication:

- Consistent specification and implementation across languages via [AIPs](https://google.aip.dev/auth)
- Seamless developer exeprience through [ADC](./4110.md)
- Unified auth solution for Google clients and tooling
- Industry leading security features for both individual and enterprise
  customers

## GUAC Compatibility

The auth libraries that meets the criteria of GUAC **should** be considered as
GUAC-compatible. The clients and toolings that depend on GUAC-compatible as
their authentication stack **should** also be considered as GUAC-compatible.

### GUAC criteria as AIPs

A set of AIPs are used to define the requirements for each GUAC version. The
libraries **must** be consistent with these AIPs to be considered as
GUAC-compatible of that specific GUAC version.

### GUAC Release Versions

GUAC is versioned. The initial version of GUAC is 1.0 which contains a basic set
of AIPs that provides the core functionalities of Google client authentication.
After the initial version, the future new major versions **should** come with
new AIPs that are backwards compatible with previous versions.

## Current Release (v1.0)

Currently we are working on the initial release of GUAC (v1.0).

### Release Theme

Unifying GCP core client authentication

### AIPs

The following AIPs are supported in this release:

- [AIP-4110] Application Default Credentials
- [AIP-4111] Self-signed JWT Access Token
- [AIP-4112] Service Account Keys [AIP-4113] Gcloud CLI Integration
- [AIP-4115] Default Credentials From Google Virtual Machines
- [AIP-4116] Identity Tokens

### Compatible Auth Libraries

The following auth libraries are considered GUAC compatible with current release
(v1.0):

| Auth Library               | Minimum Version |
|----------------------------|-----------------|
| google-auth-library-java   | 1.0.0           |
| google-auth-library-python | 1.28.0          |
| google-api-go-client       | 1.0.0           |
| google-auth-library-php    | 1.15.0          |
| google-auth-library-nodejs | 7.0.2           |
| google-auth-library-ruby   | 1.0.0           |
| gax-dotnet                 | 3.2.0           |

## Release History

There is no past releases for GUAC yet.

## Update Logs

[2021-03-14] Initial draft.
