---
id: 4118
scope: auth
state: draft
created: 2022-09-09
---

# Mutual Authentication Using Workload Credentials

Mutual TLS (a.k.a mTLS) authentication enables authentication of both client and
server identities in a TLS handshake. With workload credentials, applications
running in Google Cloud can authenticate to Google APIs using [X.509 SPIFFE
Verifiable Identity Documents][0] (SVIDs). These SVIDs are X.509 certificates
that contain [SPIFFE IDs][1] specifying the identity of the certificate owners.
mTLS authentication using X.509 SVIDs occurs when the client uses an X.509 SVID
when performing the TLS handshake.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

If users enable token binding, they **should** do so via [ADC][2]. This section
describes the general guidance of supporting such authentication.

### Provisioning Workload Credentials in Google Cloud

On Google Cloud, workload credentials should be provisioned using one of the
following methods:

- [Set up service security with Envoy][3].

- [Set up service security with proxyless gRPC][4].

In order for workload credentials to be properly used, the auth libraries
**must** support the automatic switching of the service endpoint to its mTLS
counterpart.

### Using Workload Credentials

Users **should** configure [ADC][2] to use workload credentials via the
certificate configuration gcloud metadata file. Workload credentials can be
added as a **"cert_configs"** type as follows:

```json
{
  "version": 1
  "cert_configs": {
    "workload": {
      "cert_path": "path/to/cert/file"
      "key_path": "path/to/key/file"
      "workload_identity_provider": "..."
      "authenticate_as_identity_type": "gsa/native"
      "service_account_email": "..."
    },
    "keychain": {
      ...
    },
    "pkcs11": {
      ...
    },
    "windows": {
      ...
    },
  },
  "libs": {
   ...
  }
}
```

For Linux and macOS platforms, the above metadata file is located in the
well-known gcloud config directory at
**"~/.config/gcloud/certificate_config.json"**. Note that the default location
of this file can be changed using the `GOOGLE_API_CERTIFICATE_CONFIG`
environment variable.

The following lists the fields of the **"workload"** certificate info type that
are relevant to workload credentials:

- **"cert_path"**: The specified value will be used as the full path to locate
the workload certificate file. This file **must** contain a PEM-encoded
X.509 certificate chain (ordered from leaf to root) where the leaf
certificate is a valid X.509 SVID. The chain __may__ consist of only the
leaf certificate.

- **"key_path"**: The specified value will be used as the full path to locate
the workload private key file. This file must contain a PEM-formatted
private key associated with the X.509 certificate specified by
**“cert_path”**.

The description of the **"workload_identity_provider"**,
**"authenticate_as_identity_type"** and **"service_account_email"** fields can
be found in [mTLS Token Binding][5].

To enable mutual authentication to Google APIs using workload credentials, the
**"workload"** section and its **"cert_path"** and **"key_path"** values must be
present in the **"~/.config/gcloud/certificate_config.json"** configuration
file.

### Expected Behavior

Support for mTLS authentication to Google APIs using workload credentials
**must** give priority to user mTLS endpoint override via client options. The
auth libraries **must** follow the steps below:

- Locate the workload certificate and private key files using the above
config file. If one of these files is not present, mTLS using workload
credentials may be disabled. The auth libraries **must** check that the
public and private keys in the certificate and key files match before
passing them to the TLS library.

  - Occasional mismatches may happen, since during certificate rotation the
    client library may read the two files while another process is replacing
    them. In that case, the library **must** retry reading the certificate
    and private key files and checking their match status, up to a maximum
    of four attempts. The library **should** wait for 5 seconds between
    attempts.
  - If the certificate and private key files are loaded in memory (as
    opposed to being read from disk for every mTLS connection), the auth
    libraries **must** periodically reload them (at least every 10 minutes
    or when the certificate expires) to refresh their copies in memory after
    the infrastructure rotates them. Refreshing the credentials **must** be
    done in a background thread and not upon usage.
    
- Configure the TLS library to use the found, and matched, certificate and
key for client authentication during the TLS handshake.

- If the user specifies the endpoint override via client options, use it as is
and connect to the specified endpoint using mTLS.

- If the user does not specify the endpoint override, use the default mTLS
endpoint if the certificate and key files exist and the default regular
endpoint otherwise.
    
Note that mTLS 1.3 **must** be the only supported version to preserve client
identity and certificate confidentiality.

One implication of the above logic is that if the user enables mTLS
authentication using workload credentials, provides valid certificate and key
files, and specifies a non-mTLS endpoint override, the client libraries
**should** use the certificate and key anyway and let the server decide what to
do. This avoids introducing client-side logic that parses whether the endpoint
override is an mTLS URL, since the URL pattern may change at any time.

### Obtaining the Default mTLS Endpoint

The default mTLS endpoint for a service **should** be read from the Discovery
Document field **"mtlsRootUrl"** instead of generated via regex patterns.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/X509-SVID.md
[1]: https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/SPIFFE-ID.md#2-spiffe-identity
[2]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4110
[3]: https://cloud.google.com/traffic-director/docs/security-envoy-setup
[4]: https://cloud.google.com/traffic-director/docs/security-proxyless-setup
[5]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4119
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
