---
id: 4119
scope: auth
state: draft
created: 2022-09-09
---

# mTLS Token Binding

Token binding allows issuing Google access tokens that are bound to mTLS
credentials. The advantage of such mTLS bound tokens is that they are meant to
only be used over secure channels established via mTLS credentials they are
bound to. Therefore, using bound tokens is more secure than bearer tokens which
can be stolen and adversarially replayed.

This AIP describes the flow of (1) obtaining access tokens bound to X.509
certificate identities, called identity-bound tokens and (2) how to use them to
access Google APIs using the Google auth libraries.

**Note:** Because this AIP describes guidance and requirements in a
language-neutral way, it uses generic terminology which may be imprecise or
inappropriate in certain languages or environments.

## Guidance

If users enable token binding, they **should** do so via [ADC][0]. This section
describes the general guidance of supporting such tokens.

### Prerequisites

Identity-bound access tokens require that the clients have
[X.509 SPIFFE Verifiable Identity Documents][1] (SVIDs). [Mutual Authentication
Using Workload Credentials][2] describes how such SVIDs are provisioned in
Google Cloud.

Additionally, identity-bound access tokens tokens require configuring a workload
identity pool and identity provider with Google Cloud's IAM. The instructions on
how to do this are out of scope of this AIP.

### Using mTLS Token Binding

The auth libraries **must** support the following values in the
**"~/.config/gcloud/certificate_config.json"** configuration file. Note that the
default location of this file can be changed using the
`GOOGLE_API_CERTIFICATE_CONFIG` environment variable.

```json
{
  "version": 1
  "cert_configs": {
    "workload": {
      "cert_path": "path/to/cert/file"
      "key_path": "path/to/key/file"
      "workload_identity_provider": "..."
      "authenticate_as_identity_type": "gsa/native"
      "service_account_email": "..."
    },
    "keychain": {
      ...
    },
    "pkcs11": {
      ...
    },
    "windows": {
      ...
    },
  },
  "libs": {
   ...
  }
}
```

The following lists the fields relevant to mTLS token binding configuration:

- **"workload_identity_provider"**: The specified value will be used to
populate the request to Security Token Service (STS) to request
identity-bound access tokens. This value refers to the fully qualified name
of the workload identity pool and identity provider configured in IAM. The
specified value **must** be of the following format.

```
"workload_identity_provider":"//iam.googleapis.com/projects/<project_number>/locations/global/workloadIdentityPools/<pool_identifier>/providers/<provider_identifier>"
```

- **"authenticate_as_identity_type"**: This field specifies what identity is
used to authenticate to Google APIs. The value can be set to `gsa` or
`native`, where `gsa` is the GCP service account of the workload, e.g., the
GCP service account of a GCE VM, and `native` is the native workload
identity, e.g., the GKE pod kubernetes service account. If not specified,
the default value is `gsa`.

- **"service_account_email"**: If set, the specified value will be used to
populate the request to the IAM Credentials service to request
identity-bound access tokens. This value refers to the service account email
to be used for resource access. If not set, the service account email will
be determined automatically by querying the following Metadata Service
endpoint:
`http://metadata/computeMetadata/v1/instance/service-accounts/default/email`.
The value of this field is only relevant if
**"authenticate_as_identity_type"** is set to `gsa`.

The description of the **"cert_path"** and **"key_path"** fields can be found in
[Mutual Authentication Using Workload Credentials][2].

To enable using token binding when communicating with Google APIs the following
conditions are required:

- [Mutual Authentication Using Workload Credentials][2] **must** be enabled.

- The **"workload_identity_provider"** **must** be present,
**"authenticate_as_identity_type"** __may__ be set and
**"service_account_email"** __may__ be set in the **"workload"**
section of the **"~/.config/gcloud/certificate_config.json"** configuration
file.

### Expected Behavior

To support the usage of identity-bound access tokens, the auth libraries
**must** follow the steps below when sending requests to Google APIs:

1. Connect to the mTLS endpoint of the [STS API][3] using the workload
credentials provisioned as described in [Mutual Authentication Using
Workload Credentials][2]. This endpoint **must** be
`sts.mtls.googleapis.com`.

1. Send an HTTP request to STS’s [ExchangeToken][5] method requesting an
identity-bound token using the information in the
**"workload_identity_provider"** field in the
**"~/.config/gcloud/certificate_config.json"** configuration file. The
scope of the requested token **must** be
`https://www.googleapis.com/auth/iam`.

1. Connect to the mTLS endpoint of the [IAM Credentials Service API][4] using
the workload credentials provisioned as described in [Mutual Authentication
Using Workload Credentials][2]. This endpoint **must** be
`iamcredentials.mtls.googleapis.com`.

1. If **"authenticate_as_identity_type"** is set to `gsa`, send an HTTP
request to the IAM Credentials Service’s [GenerateAccessToken][6] method
requesting an identity bound token asserting the service account email in
the **"service_account_email"** field in the
**"~/.config/gcloud/certificate_config.json"** configuration file. The
scope of this token **must** be the same scope defined by the user for
accessing the requested Google API.

1. Attach the returned token in Step 4 to the request. Note that this request
**must** be sent over an mTLS channel using the same workload credentials
in Step 1.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4110
[1]: https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/X509-SVID.md
[2]: https://google.aip.dev/auth/4118
[3]: https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/reference/sts/rest
[4]: https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/reference/credentials/rest
[5]: https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/reference/sts/rest/v1/TopLevel/token
[6]: https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/reference/credentials/rest/v1/projects.serviceAccounts/generateAccessToken
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
