---
aip:
  id: 3021
  state: approved
  created: 2019-10-04
  updated: 2019-10-04
  type: guidance
  scope: aog
js:
  - /assets/js/graphviz/viz.js
  - /assets/js/graphviz/lite.render.js
  - /assets/js/aip/aip-graphviz.js
permalink: /3021
redirect_from:
  - /3021
---

# Type protos in Actions on Google APIs

Many Actions on Google fulfillment APIs need to represent typed data (datetime,
money, etc.). In some cases, there are common components for representing these
types.

## Guidance

Fulfillment APIs **must** use the Actions on Google common types when
applicable, and **must not** use alternative type protos. For example, an API
which needs to represent a monetary amount **must** use
[google.type.Money][money], and **must not** use an alternative representation.

APIs **may** wrap existing types in new protos. This may be useful in order to
define compound types, provide additional metadata, provide semantic signals
(if the typed value was obtained from a user query), etc.

## Actions on Google common types

The Actions on Google common types include all the protobuf types and API types
defined in [AIP-213][], as well as all the protos in
[google.actions.type.\*][actions-type].

### Adding new types

If a given API needs a type for which there is no existing common type, and the
type is not conceptually specific to that API, and the type is well understood
enough to be modeled in a permanent/unversioned way, then API author **should**
consider proposing a new Actions on Google common type in
[google.actions.type.\*][actions-type].

The guidance in the appendix of [AIP-213][] also applies to creating new
Actions on Google common types. Specifically, API authors proposing new types
**should** consider whether a new type should be a Google-wide common type
rather than an Actions on Google common type. One exception to this is that new
Actions on Google common types are not proposed by opening a GitHub ticket.
Instead, Actions on Google API authors who want to create a new type should
email the owners of the //google/actions/type directory directly.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-213]: ../0213.md
[date]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/tree/master/google/type/date.proto
[timeofday]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/tree/master/google/type/timeofday.proto
[duration]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/tree/master/src/google/protobuf/duration.proto
[money]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/tree/master/google/type/money.proto
[postaladdress]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/tree/master/google/type/postal_address.proto
[type]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/tree/master/google/type/
[actions-type]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/tree/master/google/actions/type/
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
