---
aip:
  id: 4221
  scope: client-libraries
  state: approved
  created: 2019-06-17
permalink: /client-libraries/4221
redirect_from:
  - /4221
---

# Client-side retry

Many APIs have error modes that a client should retry. These error modes vary
across APIs, leaving users to hand-write retry logic around client libraries
based on available documentation. Client libraries have the opportunity to help
by implementing automatic client-side retries of well-known error modes.

## Guidance

Client libraries **should** provide automatic, client-side retry logic. Client
libraries with automatic client-side retry logic **should** provide a mechanism
for users to specify error codes to be retried and delays for those retries.

Client libraries for API systems that support remotely-resolved client retry
configuration **should** respect the remotely-resolved configuration. However,
user configuration **must** be honored.

Client library generators implementing this feature **must** accept a retry
configuration. This retry configuration **may** be supplied via a `protoc`
plugin option. In the absence of a given retry configuration, client library
generators **should not** generate a default retry configuration.

### Retry implementation

Client libraries **should** make client-side retry transparent to the user. The
user **should not** have to opt-in to client-side retry explicitly, but the
user **must** have a way to disable client-side retry altogether.

### Retry configuration mechanisms

Client libraries **should** surface a mechanism through which users may control
the client-side retry configuration, including disabling client-side retry
altogether.

For example, Go client libraries for gRPC services can supply an option,
[WithDisableRetry][0], at client initialization to disable the use of the
automatic client-side retry logic.

```go
opts := []grpc.DialOption{
  grpc.WithDisableRetry(),
  grpc.WithTransportCredentials(creds),
}

cc, err := grpc.Dial("my.api.net:443", opts...)
if err != nil {
  // ...
}
```

### Remotely-resolved client configuration

Some API systems have built-in mechanisms for clients to retrieve a
remotely-defined configuration that includes client-side retry configuration.

For example, gRPC supports the [resolution of client configuration][1] that
includes configuration for [automatic client-side retry][2].

Client libraries **should** respect the remotely-resolved configuration, except
when a user overrides it via the aforementioned client library
[retry configuration mechanisms](#retry-configuration-mechanisms).

### Client library generator retry configuration

Client library generators that implement client-side retry **must** accept a
retry configuration. This is to enable API producers to supply a retry
configuration that best-suits their service.

For example, gRPC client-side retry is configured with a [RetryPolicy][3]
within a [gRPC Service Config][4]. Here is a configuration that applies the
`RetryPolicy` to all methods in the `google.example.library.v1.LibraryService`
service, except for those that are explicitly named which get no `RetryPolicy`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```json
{
  "methodConfig": [{
    "name": [{ "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService" }],
    "waitForReady": true,
    "timeout": "60s",
    "retryPolicy": {
      "maxAttempts": 3,
      "initialBackoff": "0.01s",
      "maxBackoff": "60s",
      "backoffMultiplier": 1.3,
      "retryableStatusCodes": ["UNAVAILABLE", "UNKNOWN"]
    }
  },
  {
    "name": [
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "CreateShelf" },
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "DeleteShelf" },
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "MergeShelves" },
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "CreateBook" },
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "DeleteBook" },
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "UpdateBook" },
      { "service": "google.example.library.v1.LibraryService", "method": "MoveBook" }
    ],
    "waitForReady": true,
    "timeout": "60s"
  }]
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

The retry configuration **may** be a `protoc` plugin option. For example, a
generator could accept the file path of the configuration with an option like:

    --{plugin_name}_opt="retry-config=/path/to/config.file"

In the absence of a retry configuration, a generator **should not** generate a
"default" retry configuration. This results in a generated client library that
does not retry anything unless configured to do so by the user.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[0]: https://godoc.org/google.golang.org/grpc#WithDisableRetry
[1]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/837a99e1d49a892e6f2c46ee09a1b6b8405571c6/doc/naming.md#resolver-plugins
[2]: https://github.com/grpc/proposal/blob/d4fc009e55f95297374e821d67d679b931753a59/A6-client-retries.md
[3]: https://github.com/grpc/proposal/blob/d4fc009e55f95297374e821d67d679b931753a59/A6-client-retries.md#retry-policy
[4]: https://github.com/grpc/proposal/blob/d4fc009e55f95297374e821d67d679b931753a59/A6-client-retries.md#integration-with-service-config
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Further reading

- For which error codes to retry, see [AIP-194](https://aip.dev/194).
