---
aip:
  id: 4231
  scope: client-libraries
  state: approved
  created: 2018-06-22
  updated: 2019-05-09
permalink: /client-libraries/4231
redirect_from:
  - /4231
---

# Parsing resource names

In resource-oriented design ([AIP-121][]), _resources_ represent the primary
nouns within APIs, and often have _resource names_ ([AIP-122][]). These
resource names convey information about the structure and hierarchy of the
resource structure in that API. APIs accept these resource names as parameters
when retrieving and modifying resources, and when referencing them in other
objects. However, users may struggle to piece together resource names to send,
and client libraries have the opportunity to make this easier through the use
of helper components.

## Guidance

Client libraries **may** provide helper classes or functions to make
constructing resource names more straightforward. However, client libraries
that choose to implement this feature **must** always accept the plain strings
also, for two reasons:

1. An existing API that adds resource descriptor annotations should be able to
   do so without incurring a breaking change.
2. Resource name patterns occasionally evolve, and users need to be able to
   send and receive resource names that a statically-compiled client library
   may not yet acknowledge.

### Resource messages

A resource in an API always has a message that describes the representation of
that resource in that API. Client library generators are able to recognize
these messages when they are annotated with the `google.api.resource`
annotation:

```proto
// A representation of a Topic in Pub/Sub.
message Topic {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "pubsub.googleapis.com/Topic"
    pattern: "projects/{project}/topics/{topic}"
  };

  // The resource's name.
  string name = 1;

  // And so on...
}
```

- The `type` field provides the [unified resource type][aip-123] name.
  - Client libraries **should** name their helper component based on this
    value.
  - The universal resource type usually (but not always) ends with a name that
    matches the name of the message.
- The `pattern` field provides the structure of this resource type's names.
  - The components in braces represent variable substitutions. Client libraries
    implementing this feature **must** accept variables based on these names
    when building resource name strings.
  - Variable substitution names are usually specified in `snake_case`, but this
    is not guaranteed. Client libraries **should** be able to accept any
    annotation that uses any sane case system.
  - Patterns are usually slash-separated, but this is not guaranteed. Client
    libraries **should** use string interpolation to piece together the
    resource name.
- The defining message is expected to contain a field called `name`, which is
  the field holding the resource name.
  - APIs are able to override the name field's name by setting the `name_field`
    property on the `google.api.resource` annotation.
  - Code generators **should** fail with an error if a message is annotated as
    a resource and has no name field (either the default of `name` or the field
    provided in the `name_field` property of the annotation). Code generators
    **should** also fail with an error if the field is not a string).

### Multi-pattern resources

Occasionally, a resource may have more than one pattern. The common case for
this is when a resource can live under more than one parent type. In this
situation, the `pattern` field on the annotation can be specified more than
once:

```proto
message LogEntry {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "logging.googleapis.com/Log"
    pattern: "projects/{project}/logs/{log}"
    pattern: "organizations/{organization}/logs/{log}"
    pattern: "folders/{folder}/logs/{log}"
    pattern: "billingAccounts/{billing_account}/logs/{log}"
  }

  // The resource's name.
  string name = 1;

  // And so on...
}
```

If necessary, client libraries **may** create a separate helper component for
each pattern, and **may** provide a rollup component.

### Resources without messages

Occasionally, a resource may be implicitly defined by an API service, but not
have an explicit message representing that resource. (For example, the
[Firestore API][] defines databases as a common ancestor to its resources, but
does not define a database message.)

In this situation, APIs annotate the resource on the _file_ instead of on a
_message_, using the `google.api.resource_definition` annotation:

```proto
option (google.api.resource_definition) = {
  type: "firestore.googleapis.com/Database"
  pattern: "projects/{project}/databases/{database}"
};
```

Client library generators implementing this feature **must** generate the same
utility components that would be generated when encountering a
[resource message](#resource-messages).

### Referencing other resources

APIs often use resource names for referencing fields defined elsewhere. This is
particularly common with the request messages for the standard methods, such as
[Get][aip-131] and [Update][aip-134]; however, resources and other structures
use resource name strings as references also.

Client libraries implementing this feature **should** also provide their helper
components when resources are being referenced. Client libraries are able to
recognize these fields when they are annotated with the
`google.api.resource_reference` annotation:

```proto
message GetTopicRequest {
  // The name of the topic to retrieve.
  string name = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "pubsub.googleapis.com/Topic"
  }];
}
```

The resource reference references the [unified resource type][aip-123] name.

Some methods also refer to the _parent_ of a type, and in situations where
there are multiple parents, it is repetitive and error-prone to refer to each
individual parent type. In these situations, API producers specify `child_type`
rather than `type`:

```proto
message ListLogEntriesRequest {
  // The collection of log entries to list.
  string parent = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    child_type: "logging.googleapis.com/Log"
  }];
}
```

In this situation, client library generators implementing this feature **must**
derive the set of parent resources from the child type.

### Referencing an arbitrary resource

Occasionally, a field may reference an arbitrary resource. In this case, APIs
use the special value `*` in their resource reference.

```proto
message GetIamPolicyRequest {
  string resource = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "*"
  }];
}
```

In this situation, client library generators implementing this feature **may**
provide a generic utility class or function to address that resource name.

### Backwards compatibility

Client libraries implementing helper components for resources **must** conform
to the following backwards-compatibility expectations:

- The addition of a `google.api.resource` annotation on an existing message
  **must** be a backwards-compatible change.
- An existing resource **must** be able to add new patterns without breaking
  changes as long as the following conditions are met:
  - New patterns must always be appended to the list.
  - If migrating from one pattern to two patterns, the
    `ORIGINALLY_SINGLE_PATTERN` flag is also added.
  - If migrating from one pattern with the the `FUTURE_MULTI_PATTERN` flag set,
    the `ORIGINALLY_SINGLE_PATTERN` flag is _not_ added.
- The addition of a `google.api.resource_reference` annotation on an existing
  field **must** be a backwards-compatible change.

## Further reading

- For more on resource names and patterns, see [AIP-122][].
- For more on unified resource types, see [AIP-123][].

## Changelog

- **2019-09-16**: Added guidance for resources without messages.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-121]: ../0121.md
[aip-122]: ../0122.md
[aip-123]: ../0123.md
[aip-131]: ../0131.md
[aip-134]: ../0134.md
[firestore api]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/tree/master/google/firestore/v1
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
