---
id: 4232
state: approved
created: 2018-06-22
---

# Method signatures

In protocol buffer RPCs, each RPC takes exactly one argument: a message.
However, sending a full message structure can be cumbersome in the case of
extremely simple requests.

Many RPCs provide information about which pieces of the request are important
and commonly used. In many languages, functions and methods take multiple
positional or keyword arguments.

## Guidance

Some APIs provide annotations to hint how to effectively translate from a
single request object to individual arguments, and client libraries **may**
provide overloads based on these hints.

However, client libraries implementing this feature **must** retain the default
behavior of accepting the full request object. Put another way, if an API
_adds_ this annotation to an already-published API, the resulting library
change **must** be backwards-compatible.

Client library generators **may** also choose to provide this functionality in
some cases but not others, as appropriate in the environment. For example, any
of the following strategies would be permissible:

- Providing overloads iff all arguments in the signature are primitives.
- Providing overloads only for the first of multiple signatures when providing
  more than one would produce a conflict.
- Any combination of the above.

In all of these situations, the requirement that the request object is always
accepted still applies.

Furthermore, client library generators **may** choose to support this
functionality for a subset of RPC types, those being:

- Unary
- Server Streaming
- Client Streaming
- Bi-directional Streaming

### Method Signatures

An RPC with the [`google.api.method_signature`][method_signature] annotation
indicates that an overload with a flattened method signature is desired where
supported. The string contains comma-separated arguments, in order. If a
field's name contains a period (`.`) character, this indicates a nested field.

An RPC can provide this annotation more than once to specify multiple
signatures. Order matters here: In some situations, it may not be possible to
generate an overload for every signature provided. In this situation, client
library generators **must** follow a "first match wins" strategy (generate an
overload for the first signature in the conflict set, and drop the rest).

**Note:** A corollary to this is that it is only guaranteed to be a
backwards-compatible change to _append_ method signature annotations.

### Required Arguments

Often, certain fields on the request message are consistently required, as
described in [AIP-203][].

While client libraries generally should not perform validation on this (that is
the server's role), client libraries **may** distinguish required arguments in
method signatures from optional ones if appropriate for the language. A field
is considered required for this purpose if annotated with the
`google.api.field_behavior` annotation value of `REQUIRED`:

```proto
message TranslateTextRequest {
  // The text to translate.
  string q = 1 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];
}
```

**Note:** The annotation for field behavior is attached to _the field_, not the
method.

### Restrictions

If an RPC lists a nested field in
[`google.api.method_signature`][method_signature] (for example,
`"foo.bar.baz"`), none of the individual component fields may be repeated
except for the last one (continuing the example, `baz` could be repeated but
`foo` or `bar` could not be). Code generators implementing this feature
**must** error with a descriptive error message if encountering a non-terminal
repeated field as a field name.

If any fields are required arguments, all required arguments are expected to
appear before any optional ones. Code generators implementing this feature
**should** error with a descriptive error message if encountering a required
field after an optional one, and **must** do so if the resulting client library
would not be valid.

### Compatibility

Removing, reordering or altering an existing `google.api.method_signature`
entry is a breaking change for client libraries. The associated generated
method is either removed entirely or its signature is altered, both of which
break user code.

## Changelog

- **2020-07-14**: Added caveat for supporting some RPC types
- **2019-09-27**: Added a Compatibility section.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-203]: ../0203.md
[method_signature]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/api/client.proto#L100
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
