---
aip:
  id: 4233
  scope: client-libraries
  state: approved
  created: 2018-06-22
  updated: 2019-05-09
permalink: /client-libraries/4233
redirect_from:
  - /4233
---

# Automatic pagination

Many API responses, particularly to list and search methods, are paginated
([AIP-158][]). Users calling these methods are then required to implement their
own pagination logic, which is common boilerplate.

## Guidance

Client libraries **may** provide automatic resolution of pagination (meaning
that it performs requests in the background on an as-needed basis).

Pagination can be inferred for an RPC when _all_ of the following conditions
are met:

- The request message contains an `int32 page_size` field.
- The request message contains a `string page_token` field.
- The response message contains a `string next_page_token` field.
- The response message contains one non-primitive `repeated` field.

Client library generators implementing this feature **must** ensure that it is
a backwards-compatible change to add client-side pagination functionality where
it was previously absent.

### Implementing pagination

For the client library to implement pagination (as defined by [AIP-158][]), it
**should** use the `next_page_token` value from the response message to
populate the `page_token` value of an otherwise-identical request message,
continuing indefinitely until the `next_page_token` value is empty.

**Important:** Client libraries that are implementing automatic resolution of
pagination should only perform requests for future pages on an as-needed basis,
and avoid greedily resolving potentially long and unnecessary result sets.

Client libraries that are implementing automatic pagination **must** still
provide access to the individual fields on the response message, in the usual
fashion.

**Note:** If the response message has more than one non-primitive `repeated`
field, the first one (in order of appearance in the file _and_ field number) is
used. If the first field by order of appearance in the message and the first
field by field number do not match, code generators that implement automatic
pagination **should** fail with an error.

[aip-158]: ../0158.md
