---
id: 4290
state: approved
created: 2018-11-08
---

# Docker interface

A consequence of using individual generators for API client library generation
is that each generator has its own set of dependencies and requirements in
order to run.

This is reasonable for a user who wishes to generate many libraries for a
single environment, but presents challenges for a user wishing to generate a
single API for many languages or environments. Users need a way to generate
libraries easily and quickly, with minimal ramp-up per language.

## Guidance

Client library generators **should** ship [Docker][] images providing the
generator and exposing a common interface, so that generating the same API in
multiple languages usually only requires substituting in the appropriate Docker
image. Docker images for Google-authored generators will follow a consistent
scheme.

### CLI usage

The expected user command to invoke the code generator in a Docker image (from
the proto import root, on a POSIX machine):

```bash
$ docker run --rm --user $UID \
  --mount type=bind,source=`pwd`/a/b/c/v1/,destination=/in/a/b/c/v1/,readonly \
  --mount type=bind,source=/path/to/dest/,destination=/out/ \
  gcr.io/gapic-images/{GENERATOR} \
  [-- additional options...]
```

**Note:** Even though each component of this is standard in the Docker
ecosystem (other than the destination path issue, which is a result of how
protoc handles imports), this is still a rather long command. We can provide a
[shortcut script][] to further simplify this, but such a script would be for
convenience and not a replacement for this interface.

### Container composition

Containers **must** include:

- A current version of protoc, the protocol buffer compiler.
- Common protos permitted to be used by all APIs ([googleapis][]).
- The applicable code generator plugin, as well as any dependencies it
  requires.
  - The code generator plugin itself **should** be added using an `ADD` or
    `COPY` statement from the host machine at build time and installed locally;
    it **should not** pull from a package manager. (This leads to catch-22
    situations when cutting releases.)
  - Images **may** include either a pre-compiled binary of the plugin, or the
    installed source code, depending on the needs of the applicable ecosystem.
  - Installation of dependencies **should** use appropriate package managers.

The common protos and the protoc compiler are supplied by an independent image
(`gcr.io/gapic-images/api-common-protos`). Both `protoc` and the common protos
can be retrieved from this image into a generator's image using the
`COPY --from` syntax (see [multi-stage builds][]). This is the preferred
approach as it follows Docker conventions, and allows the protos to be
versioned independently.

### Base images

**TL;DR:** Each language probably wants `language:x.y-alpine` or
`language:x.y-slim`. For example, `ruby:2.5-alpine` or `python:3.7-slim`.
(Alpine images are smaller but idiosyncratic.)

The following guidelines apply to selecting base images (sorted roughly from
most important to least important):

- Images **should** generally be based off an official image for the latest
  stable version of the language in which the generator is implemented.
- Images **should** be able to install required system dependencies from a
  well-understood package manager.
- Images **should** be ultimately based off of Alpine, Debian, or Ubuntu. This
  is to ensure we benefit from GCR's [vulnerability scanning][].
- Images should endeavor to be as small as possible, in line with the general
  expectations of the Docker community:
  - Use the smallest base image you can. Alpine-based images are great if
    possible, but may not always be reasonable. "Slim" Debian images are
    usually the next best (and probably significantly more feasible in many
    situations).

### Mount points

`protoc` must read protos (representing the API to be generated) from disk, and
must write the final output (the client library) to disk. Because the user has
the API protos on the host machine, and will ultimately need the output to go
to said host machine, Docker images **should** use two mount points. This
creates a hole in the abstraction layer: the user must mount the appropriate
locations on the host machine to the appropriate locations in the container.

The expected locations in the container **must** be constant, and consistent
between all generator container images:

- `/in/`: The location of the protos to be generated. This **must** be the
  import root.
  - Example: If generating protos for the Language API, the protos in the
    Docker image must live in `/in/google/cloud/language/v1/`.
- `/out/`: The location to which the client library shall be written.

### Plugin options

Some micro-generators support configuration provided via protoc plugin options.
In such cases, the options must be routed from the CLI input to the protoc
command.

The ultimate protoc invocation could look like the following:

```bash
protoc --proto_path {path/to/common/protos} --proto_path /in/ \
       --{LANG}_gapic_out /out/ \
       --{LANG}_gapic_opt "go-gapic-package=GO_PACKAGE_VALUE" \
       `find /in/ -name *.proto`
```

A resulting invocation of the Docker image would be as follows:

```bash
$ docker run --rm --user $UID \
      --mount type=bind,source=`pwd`/a/b/c/v1/,destination=/in/a/b/c/v1/,readonly \
      --mount type=bind,source=/path/to/dest/,destination=/out/ \
      gcr.io/gapic-images/{GENERATOR} \
      --go-gapic-package GO_PACKAGE_VALUE
```

Thus shortcut scripts written to wrap the Docker image invocation **must** pass
all options occurring after `--` to the underlying docker run command. The
internal Docker image **must** provide the conversion from usual shell syntax
to the protoc option syntax.

Client library generators that make use of plugin options **must** accept those
options as either flags or `key=value` pairs. (If a generator receives a string
without an `=` character, that is a flag, and the implied value is `true`.) If
multiple options are provided, they are comma-separated, to conform with the
protoc behavior if multiple `--opt` flags are specified.

Additionally, generators **should** prefix all understood option keys with the
target language for that generator (e.g. `go-gapic-package`,
`java-gapic-package`), and **should** use `kebab-case` for keys (in order to
match Docker, since protoc is inconsistent).

Microgenerators **must not** error on option keys that they do not recognize,
although they **may** issue a warning.

### Publishing images

Images for Google-created generators **should** be published in
`gcr.io/gapic-images`, a dedicated project in [Google Container Registry][].

Images **should** follow the naming scheme:

    gcr.io/gapic-images/gapic-generator-{lang}

CI **should** be configured to push a new Docker image to the registry when
releases are made. When a release is tagged in GitHub (with a version number,
such as 1.0.3), the CI service should build an image based on the code at that
tag.

The resulting image **should** be tagged with each component of the version
number, as well as `latest`, and the resulting tags pushed the registry. (This
is in addition to pushing to a package manager if appropriate, which is outside
the scope of this AIP.)

This means that a release tag of `1.0.3` in GitHub would result in pushing the
following four tags to GCR:

- `gcr.io/gapic-images/gapic-generator-{lang}:1`
- `gcr.io/gapic-images/gapic-generator-{lang}:1.0`
- `gcr.io/gapic-images/gapic-generator-{lang}:1.0.3`
- `gcr.io/gapic-images/gapic-generator-{lang}:latest`

**Note:** These rules assumes that releases have ever-increasing version
numbers; this process will need to be amended slightly if a generator needs to
maintain multiple version streams simultaneously.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[googleapis]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis
[docker]: https://docker.com/
[google container registry]: https://cloud.google.com/container-registry/
[multi-stage builds]: https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/multistage-build/
[shortcut script]: https://github.com/googleapis/gapic-generator-python/blob/master/gapic.sh
[vulnerability scanning]: https://cloud.google.com/container-registry/docs/container-analysis#vulnerability_source
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
