# Declarative-friendly APIs

Welcome to the sixth edition of the **AIP newsletter**, which is designed to
keep you up to date about the AIP program, and particular proposals making
their way through the system.

We have an exciting slate of AIPs entering review this cycle, all around the
theme of "declarative-friendly APIs". The linchpin here is AIP-128, which
introduces and explains the topic.

The idea behind declarative-friendly APIs addresses an important need: the
ability to integrate with popular, declarative tools, such as Kubernetes or
Terraform. These tools and others are used by numerous developers, and the
follow a straightforward paradigm: the user provides the tool with the desired
state, and the tool brings that state into fruition.

Integrations with these tools is critical for cloud providers, but with the
number of services _and_ the number of tools continuously increasing, support
is difficult without a reliance on automation. Automation, in turn, requires
strong consistency.

While ordinarily AIPs stay in review for about a month, we intend for this
review cycle to be longer, to allow time for APIs to be released that follow
this guidance. Assuming the feedback is sufficiently positive, we will probably
be looking at formal approval around the end of the year.

## AIPs under review

### AIP-128: Declarative-friendly interfaces

> Many services need to interact with common DevOps tools, particularly those
> that create and manage network-addressible resources (such as virtual
> machines, load balancers, database instances, and so on). These tools revolve
> around the principle of "configuration as code": the user specifies the
> complete intended landscape, and tooling is responsible for making whatever
> changes are necessary to achieve the user's specification.
>
> These tools are **declarative**: rather than specifying specific actions to
> take, they specify the desired _outcome_, with the actions being derived
> based on the differences between the current landscape and the intended one.

[Declarative-friendly interfaces][aip-128] describes patterns for making
interfaces that are friendly to automated tooling. The basic idea is that by
being more strict and consistent, it becomes possible to write tools that
"translate" the interface to a declarative form without having to know anything
about the specific API.

This reduces feature latency for users. Essentially, the adapter or plugin can
be automatically generated, and so an automated pipeline becomes possible: as
soon as the service launches new features, they become available in the
adapters also.

Because declarative-friendliness is a wide-ranging concept, impacting the
guidance in numerous other AIPs as well, it was difficult to determine how to
structure the information. Therefore, this AIP also has a robust "further
reading" section that points to declarative-friendly guidance in other AIPs.

**Summary:** [AIP-128][] provides an explanation of what it means for a service
to be declarative-friendly, and why a service might want to adopt these
patterns. It also indexes declarative-friendly guidance found in other AIPs.

[aip-128]: /128

### AIP-148: Standard fields

> Certain concepts are common throughout any corpus of APIs. In these
> situations, it is useful to have a standard field name that is used
> consistently to communicate that concept.

[Standard fields][aip-148] is, in some ways, an overdue AIP. It describes
fields common throughout our corpus, such as `name`, `parent`, and
`create_time`, that were on the list of standard fields in the original API
style guide and did not get a full treatment in other AIPs. Common fields that
are covered in other AIPs are not discussed in this one. (As an example,
`language_code` is given extensive treatment in [AIP-143][], so not repeated
here.)

This takes on new importance with our focus on declarative-friendly APIs
because tools written to marshal between a declarative tool and the service can
see those tools and know what they mean.

**Summary:** [AIP-148][] describes common fields that are already in common use
throughout our API corpus. It also describes certain fields that are expected
on declarative-friendly resources.

[aip-143]: /143
[aip-148]: /148

### AIP-164: Soft delete

> There are several reasons why a client could desire soft delete and undelete
> functionality, but one over-arching reason stands out: recovery from
> mistakes. A service that supports undelete makes it possible for users to
> recover resources that were deleted by accident.

[Soft delete][aip-164] is increasingly critical for APIs that need to cater to
enterprise users, due to the need to be able to recover from mistakes without
data loss. While [AIP-135][] previously discussed soft delete, it was clear
that a more thorough treatment is necessary.

This AIP goes through the request patterns in more detail, and discusses topics
such as LROs and errata, that are relevant to soft delete and undelete.

**Summary:** [AIP-164][] expands the guidance on soft delete and undelete and
provides a more detailed look at both.

[aip-135]: /135
[aip-164]: /164

## AIP sections under review

Because of the need to add declarative-friendly guidance into existing AIPs,
certain sections needed to be introduced into existing, approved AIPs in a
reviewing state. These are all in use for declarative-friendly guidance and
would be approved alongside AIP-128:

- AIP-134: [Create or update](/134#create-or-update)
- AIP-135: [Delete if existing](/135#delete-if-existing)
- AIP-136: [Custom method restrictions](/136#declarative-friendly-resources)

Additionally, new sections in [AIP-154](/154#declarative-friendly-resources)
and [AIP-163](/163#declarative-friendly-resources) mandate the use of these
concepts for declarative-friendly resources.

## Recent updates

In addition to the new AIPs under review, we have added the following guidance
to existing AIPs:

- [AIP-122](/122): Clarified when to use full resource names
  ([#629](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/pull/629))
- [AIP-132](/132): Loosened guidance around top-level resources
  ([#602](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/pull/602))
- [AIP-132](/132): Added `PERMISSION_DENIED` guidance
  ([#582](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/pull/582))
- [AIP-151](/151): Clarified that `stream` and LROs are mutually incompatible
  ([#597](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/pull/597))
- [AIP-216](/216): Clarified that states are not directly set on Create
  ([#606](https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/pull/606))

Special thanks to Andrew Paseltiner and Peter Novotney for some of these
changes, and to several others who send minor corrections not noted here.
