---
aip:
  id: 2
  state: approved
  created: 2018-08-23
  updated: 2019-10-03
permalink: /2
redirect_from:
  - /02
  - /002
  - /0002
---

# AIP Numbering

The AIP system provides a mechanism to index and have a single source of truth
for API Improvement Proposals, as well as iterate on them collaboratively and
transparently.

This document describes the AIP numbering system.

## Assigning AIP Numbers

The AIP editors (see [AIP-1](./0001.md)) are responsible for assigning a number
to each AIP when it is accepted as a draft for review. Importantly, _all_ AIPs
have numbers, not just approved ones. The [AIP Index](/) clearly delineates
which AIPs are approved and binding and which are under discussion.

The editors may decide to reserve a specific block of numbers for groups of
AIPs that are related in some way (for example, that are only scoped to a
specific subset of APIs).

Beyond this, AIP numbers are assigned arbitrarily. In general, the editors will
take the next AIP number off of the stack to assign to a draft AIP, but
occasionally may use a special/joke number if useful for mnemonic or other
reasons.

## AIP Blocks

Currently recognized blocks of AIP numbers are:

### Generally Applicable

- **1-99:** Reserved for meta-AIPs (generally process-related).
- **100-999:** General API design guidance

To request a block for a specific team that is publishing API guidance or
documentation germane to that specific team, reach out to api-editors@.

### Custom AIPs

If you creating your own set of AIPs for your company or organization and want
to maintain compatibility with aip.dev, you will need to prefix your custom AIP
IDs with a unique prefix. This will ensure that additional AIPs added to
aip.dev will not conflict with any custom AIPs you might add.

For example. assume you write a new AIP for state management in your AIPs, and
pick the number `9900`. Instead of calling this `AIP-9900` you should use your
own custom prefix, like `ACU-9900` (i.e. AIP CUstom). If, in the future,
aip.dev decides to create a new AIP and use the number `9900`, you could
continue to implement that AIP in your organization under `AIP-9900` without
conflicting with your custom `ACU-9900`.

When extending a custom AIP outside of aip.dev, it is important that you link
to the original AIP. For example, if another company wanted to adopt `ACU-9900`
in their AIPs, they **must** keep the same ID and prefix, and they **must**
state the AIP they are extending in the introduction. They **must** also choose
a different three letter prefix for any custom AIPs that are unique to their
custom AIPs.

## Changelog

- **2019-10-03:** The 3000-3099 block was assigned to Actions on Google.
- **2019-01-26:** The general API design guidance block was expanded to include
  100-199.
- **2018-10-24:** The 4600-4699 block was assigned to Google Geo.
- **2018-10-02:** The 2500-2599 block was assigned to Google Cloud Platform.
- **2018-10-02:** The 2700-2799 block was assigned to Google Apps.
