---
aip:
  id: 9
  state: approved
  created: 2019-08-01
  modified: 2019-08-04
permalink: /9
redirect_from:
  - /09
  - /009
  - /0009
---

# Glossary

In the name of brevity, this AIP defines some common terminology here rather
than in each AIP individually.

## Guidance

The following terminology **should** be used consistently throughout AIPs.

API
: Application Programming Interface. This can be a local interface (such as a
  client library) or a Network API (defined below).

Network API
: An API that operates across a network of computers. Network APIs communicate
  using network protocols including HTTP, and are frequently produced by
  organizations separate from those that consume them.

Google API
: A Network API exposed by a Google service. Most of these are hosted on the
  `googleapis.com` domain. It does not include other types of APIs, such as
  client libraries and SDKs.

API Definition
: The definition of an API, usually defined in a Protocol Buffer service. An API
  Definition can be implemented by any number of API Services.

API Version
: The version of an API or a group of APIs if they are defined together. An API
  Version is often represented by a string, such as "v1", and presents in API
  requests and Protocol Buffers package names.

API Method
: An individual operation within an API. It is typically represented in Protocol
  Buffers by an `rpc` definition, and is mapped to a function in the API in most
  programming languages.

API Request
: A single invocation of an API Method. It is often used as the unit for
  billing, logging, monitoring, and rate limiting.

API Consumer
: The entity that consumes an API Service. For Google APIs, it typically is a
  Google project that owns the client application or the server resource.

API Producer
: The entity that produces an API Service. For Google APIs, it typically is a
  Google team responsible for the API Service.

API Backend
: A set of servers and related infrastructure that implements the business
  logic for an API Service. An individual API backend server is often called an
  API server.

API Frontend
: A set of servers plus related infrastructure that provides common
  functionality across API Services, such as load balancing and authentication.
  An individual API frontend server is often called an API proxy.

  **Note:** the API frontend and the API backend may run next to each other or
  far away from each other. In some cases, they can be compiled into a single
  application binary and run inside a single process.

API Service
: A deployed implementation of one or more APIs, exposed on one or more network
  addresses, such as the Cloud Pub/Sub API.

API Service Name
: Refers to the logical identifier of an API Service. Google APIs use RFC 1035
  DNS compatible names as their API Service Names, such as
  `pubsub.googleapis.com`.

API Service Endpoint
: Refers to a network address that an API Service uses to handle incoming API
  Requests. One API Service may have multiple API Service Endpoints, such as
  `https://pubsub.googleapis.com` and `https://content-pubsub.googleapis.com`.

API Product
: An API Service and its related components, such as Terms of Service,
  documentation, client libraries, and service support, are collectively
  presented to customers as a API Product. For example, Google Calendar API.

  **Note:** people sometimes refer to an API Product simply as an API.

API Service Definition
: The combination of API Definitions (`.proto` files) and API Service
  configurations (`.yaml` files) used to define an API Service. The schema for
  Google API Service Definition is `google.api.Service`.
