---
aip:
  id: 121
  state: approved
  created: 2019-01-26
permalink: /121
redirect_from:
  - /0121
---

# Resource-oriented design

Resource-oriented design is a pattern for specifying [RPC][] APIs, based on
several high-level design principles (most of which are common to recent public
HTTP APIs):

- The fundamental building blocks of an API are individually-named _resources_
  (nouns) and the relationships and hierarchy that exist between them.
- A small number of standard _methods_ (verbs) provide the semantics for most
  common operations. However, custom methods are available in situations where
  the standard methods do not fit.
- Stateless protocol: Each interaction between the client and the server is
  independent, and both the client and server have clear roles.

Readers might notice similarities between these principles and some principles
of [REST][]; resource-oriented design borrows many principles from REST, while
also defining its own patterns where appropriate.

## Guidance

When designing an API, consider the following (roughly in logical order):

- The resources (nouns) the API will provide
- The relationships and hierarchies between those resources
- The schema of each resource
- The methods (verbs) each resource provides, relying as much as possible on
  the standard verbs.

### Resources

A resource-oriented API **should** generally be modeled as a resource
hierarchy, where each node is either a simple resource or a collection of
resources.

A _collection_ contains resources of _the same type_. For example, a publisher
has the collection of books that it publishes. A resource usually has fields,
and resources may have any number of sub-resources (usually collections).

**Note:** While there is some conceptual alignment between storage systems and
APIs, a service with a resource-oriented API is not necessarily a database, and
has enormous flexibility in how it interprets resources and methods. API
designers **should not** expect that their API will be reflective of their
database schema. In fact, having an API that is identical to the underlying
database schema is actually an anti-pattern, as it tightly couples the surface
to the underlying system.

### Methods

Resource-oriented APIs emphasize resources (data model) over the methods
performed on those resources (functionality). A typical resource-oriented API
exposes a large number of resources with a small number of methods on each
resource. The methods can be either the standard methods ([Get][], [List][],
[Create][], [Update][], [Delete][]), or [custom methods][].

**Note:** A custom method in resource-oriented design does _not_ entail
defining a new or custom HTTP verb. Custom methods use traditional HTTP verbs
(usually `POST`) and define the custom verb in the URI.

APIs **should** prefer standard methods over custom methods; the purpose of
custom methods is to define functionality that does not cleanly map to any of
the standard methods. Custom methods offer the same design freedom as
traditional RPC APIs, which can be used to implement common programming
patterns, such as database transactions, import and export, or data analysis.

### Stateless protocol

As with most public APIs available today, resource-oriented APIs **must**
operate over a stateless protocol: The fundamental behavior of any individual
request is independent of other requests made by the caller.

In an API with a stateless protocol, the server has the responsibility for
persisting data, which may be shared between multiple clients, while clients
have sole responsibility and authority for maintaining the application state.

[rest]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer
[rpc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call
[get]: ./0131.md
[list]: ./0132.md
[create]: ./0133.md
[update]: ./0134.md
[delete]: ./0135.md
[custom methods]: ./0136.md

## Changelog

- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
