---
aip:
  id: 122
  state: approved
  created: 2019-01-26
permalink: /122
redirect_from:
  - /0122
---

# Resource names

Most APIs expose _resources_ (their primary nouns) which users are able to
create, retrieve, and manipulate. Additionally, resources are _named_: each
resource has a unique identifier that users use to reference that resource, and
these names are what users should _store_ as the canonical names for the
resources.

## Guidance

All resource names defined by an API **must** be unique within that API. (See
the section on [full resource names](#full-resource-names) below for more
information on referring to resources across APIs.)

Resource names are formatted according to the [URI path schema][], but without
the leading slash:

    publishers/123/books/les-miserables
    users/vhugo1802

- Resource name components **should** usually alternate between collection
  identifiers (example: `publishers`, `books`, `users`) and resource IDs
  (example: `123`, `les-miserables`, `vhugo1802`).
- Resource names **must** use the `/` character to separate individual segments
  of the resource name.
  - Non-terminal segments of a resource name **must not** contain a `/`
    character.
  - The terminal segment of a resource name **should not** contain a `/`
    character.
- Resource names **should** only use ASCII characters that do not require
  URL-escaping when possible.
  - If Unicode characters must be used, resource names **must** be stored in
    Normalization Form C (see [AIP-210][]).

**Note:** Resource names as described here are used within the scope of a
single API (or else in situations where the owning API is clear from the
context), and are only required to be unique within that scope. For this
reason, they are sometimes called _relative resource names_ to distinguish them
from _full resource names_ (discussed below).

[uri path schema]: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986#appendix-A

### Collection identifiers

The collection identifier segments in a resource name **must** be the plural
form of the noun used for the resource. (For example, a collection of
`Publisher` resources is called `publishers` in the resource name.)

- Collection identifiers **must** be concise American English terms.
- Collection identifiers **must** be in `camelCase`.
- Collection identifiers **must** begin with a lower-cased letter and contain
  only ASCII letters and numbers (`/[a-z][a-zA-Z0-9]*/`).
- Collection identifiers **must** be plural.
  - In situations where there is no plural word ("info"), or where the singular
    and plural terms are the same ("moose"), the non-pluralized (singular) form
    is correct. Collection segments **must not** "coin" words by adding "s" in
    such cases (e.g, avoid "infos").

#### Nested collections

If a resource name contains multiple levels of a hierarchy, and a parent
collection's name is used as a prefix for the child resource's name, the child
collection's name **may** omit the prefix. For example, given a collection of
`UserEvent` resources that would normally be nested underneath `users`:

```
users/vhugo1802/userEvents/birthday-dinner-226
```

An API **should** use the less-redundant form:

```
users/vhugo1802/events/birthday-dinner-226
```

In this situation, the _message_ is still called `UserEvent`; only the resource
name is shortened.

**Note:** APIs wishing to do this **must** follow this format consistently
throughout the API, or else not at all.

### Resource ID segments

A resource ID segment identifies the resource within its parent collection. In
the resource name `publishers/123/books/les-miserables`, `123` is the resource
ID for the publisher, and `les-miserables` is the resource ID for the book.

- Resource IDs **may** be either always set by users (required on resource
  creation), optionally set by users (optional on resource creation,
  server-generated if unset), or never set by users (not accepted at resource
  creation). They **should** be immutable once created.
  - If resource IDs are user-settable, the API **must** document allowed
    formats.
  - If resource IDs are not user-settable, the API **should** document the
    basic format, and any upper boundaries (for example, "at most 256
    characters").
  - For more information, see the [create][] standard method.
- Resource IDs **should** only use characters that do not require URL-escaping.
  - Characters outside of ASCII are discouraged; however, if Unicode characters
    are necessary, APIs **must** follow guidance in [AIP-210][].

[create]: ./0133.md#user-specified-ids
[aip-210]: ./0210.md

### Resource ID aliases

It is sometimes valuable to provide an alias for common lookup patterns for
resource IDs. For example, an API with `users` at the top of its resource
hierarchy may wish to provide `users/me` as a shortcut for retrieving
information for the authenticated user.

APIs **may** provide programmatic aliases for common lookup patterns. However,
all data returned from the API **must** use the canonical resource name.

### Full resource names

In most cases, resource names are used within a single API only, or else they
are used in contexts where the owning API is clear (for example,
`string pubsub_topic`).

However, sometimes it is necessary for APIs to refer to resources in an
arbitrary API. In this situation, they should use the _full resource name_. The
full resource name is a schemeless URI with the owning API's service endpoint,
followed by the relative resource name:

```
//library.googleapis.com/publishers/123/books/les-miserables
//calendar.googleapis.com/users/vhugo1802
```

### Resource URIs

The full resource name is a schemeless URI, but slightly distinct from the full
URIs we use to access a resource. The latter adds two components: the protocol
(HTTPS) and the API version:

```
https://library.googleapis.com/v1/publishers/123/books/les-miserables
https://calendar.googleapis.com/v3/users/vhugo1802
```

The version is not included in the full resource name because the full resource
name is expected to persist from version to version. Even though the API
surface may change between major versions, multiple major versions of the same
API are expected to use the same underlying data.

**Note:** The correlation between the full resource name and the service's
hostname is by convention. In particular, one service is able to have multiple
hostnames (example use cases include regionalization or staging environments),
and the full resource does not change between these.

### Fields representing resource names

When defining a resource, the first field **should** be the resource name,
which **must** be of type `string` and **must** be called `name` for the
resource name. The message **should** include a `google.api.resource`
annotation declaring the type (see [AIP-123][] for more on this).

```proto
// A representation of a book in the library.
message Book {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}"
  }

  // The resource name of the book.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1;

  // Other fields...
}
```

When defining a method that retrieves or acts on an already-existing resource
(such as `GetBook` or `ArchiveBook`), the first field of the request message
**should** be the resource name, which **must** be of type `string` and
**must** be called `name` for the resource name. The field **should** also be
annotated with the `google.api.resource_reference` annotation, referencing the
resource type ([AIP-123][]).

```proto
// Request message for ArchiveBook
message ArchiveBookRequest {
  // The book to archive.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
  }];

  // Other fields...
}
```

**Note:** Fields **must not** be called `name` except for this purpose. For
other use cases, either use a different term or prepend an adjective (for
example: `display_name`).

### Fields representing a resource's parent

When defining a method that retrieves resources from a collection or adds a new
resource to a collection (such as `ListBooks` or `CreateBook`), the first field
of the request message **should** be of type `string` and **should** be called
`parent` for the resource name of the collection. The `parent` field **should**
also be annotated with the `google.api.resource_reference` annotation,
referencing the parent's resource type ([AIP-123][]).

```proto
// Request message for ListBooks.
message ListBooksRequest {
  // The publisher to list books from.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher_id}
  string parent = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Publisher"
  }];

  // Other fields (e.g. page_size, page_token, filter, etc.)...
}
```

If there is more than one possible parent type, the `parent` field **should**
be annotated with the `child_type` key on `google.api.resource_reference`
instead:

```proto
// Request message for ListBooks.
message ListBooksRequest {
  // The publisher to list books from.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher_id}
  string parent = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    child_type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
  }];

  // Other fields (e.g. page_size, page_token, filter, etc.)...
}
```

**Note:** Fields **should not** be called `parent` except for this purpose. For
other use cases, use a synonymous term if possible.

### Fields representing another resource

When referencing a resource name for a different resource, the field **should**
be of type `string` for the resource name, and the field name **should** be
equivalent to the corresponding message's name in snake case.

- Field names **may** include a leading adjective if appropriate (such as
  `string dusty_book`).
- Field names **should not** use the `_name` suffix unless the field would be
  ambiguous without it (e.g., `crypto_key_name`)
- Fields representing another resource **should** provide the
  `google.api.resource_reference` annotation with the resource type being
  referenced.

```proto
// A representation of a book in a library.
message Book {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
    pattern: "publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}"
  }

  // Name of the book.
  // Format is `publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}`
  string name = 1;

  // The shelf where the book currently sits.
  // Format is `shelves/{shelf}`.
  string shelf = 2 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Shelf"
  }];

  // Other fields...
}
```

**Note:** When referring to other resources in this way, we use the resource
name as the value, not just the ID component. APIs **should** use the resource
name to reference resources when possible. If using the ID component alone is
strictly necessary, use an `_id` suffix (e.g. `shelf_id`).

## Further reading

- For evolving resource names over time, see
  [AIP-180](./0180.md#changing-resource-names).
- For resource types, see [AIP-123][].

## Changelog

- **2019-12-05**: Added guidance for resource annotations.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership. Also changed the final
  example from a Pub/Sub example to the usual Book example.
- **2019-07-30**: Changed the nested collection brevity suggestion from "may"
  to "should"

[aip-123]: ./0123.md
