---
aip:
  id: 123
  state: approved
  created: 2019-05-12
permalink: /123
redirect_from:
  - /0123
---

# Resource types

Most APIs expose _resources_ (their primary nouns) which users are able to
create, retrieve, and manipulate. APIs are allowed to name their resource types
as they see fit, and are only required to ensure uniqueness within that API.
This means that it is possible (and often desirable) for different APIs to use
the same type name. For example, a Memcache and Redis API would both want to
use `Instance` as a type name.

When mapping the relationships between APIs and their resources, however, it
becomes important to have a single, globally-unique type name. Additionally,
tools such as Kubernetes or GraphQL interact with APIs from multiple providers.

## Terminology

In the guidance below, we use the following terms:

- **Service Name:** This is the name defined in the [service configuration][].
  This usually (but not necessarily) matches the hostname that users use to
  call the service. Example: `pubsub.googleapis.com`. This is equivalent to an
  [API Group][] in Kubernetes.
- **Type:** This is the name used for the type within the API. This usually
  (but not necessarily) matches the name of the protobuf message. This is
  equivalent to an [Object][] in Kubernetes.

## Guidance

APIs **must** define a resource type for each resource in the API, according to
the following pattern: `{Service Name}/{Type}`. The type name **must** be
singular and use PascalCase (UpperCamelCase).

### Examples

Examples of resource types include:

- `pubsub.googleapis.com/Topic`
- `pubsub.googleapis.com/Subscription`
- `spanner.googleapis.com/Database`
- `spanner.googleapis.com/Instance`
- `networking.istio.io/Instance`

### Annotating resource types

APIs **should** annotate the resource types for each resource in the API using
the [`google.api.resource`][resource] annotation:

```proto
// A representation of a Pub/Sub topic.
message Topic {
  option (google.api.resource) = {
    type: "pubsub.googleapis.com/Topic"
    pattern: "projects/{project}/topics/{topic}"
  };

  // The resource name of the topic.
  string name = 1;

  // Other fields...
}
```

- Patterns **must** correspond to the [resource name][aip-122].
- Pattern variables (the segments within braces) **must** use `snake_case`, and
  **must not** use an `_id` suffix.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[API Group]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-groups
[Object]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#types-kinds
[resource]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/api/resource.proto
[service configuration]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/api/service.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Changelog

- **2019-12-05**: Added guidance on patterns.
- **2019-07-17**: Fleshed out the annotation example somewhat.
