---
aip:
  id: 140
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-22
permalink: /140
redirect_from:
  - /0140
---

# Field names

Naming fields in a way that is intuitive to users can often be one of the most
challenging aspects of designing an API. This is true for many reasons; often a
field name that seems entirely intuitive to the author can baffle a reader.

Additionally, users rarely use only one API; they use many APIs together. As a
result, a single company using the same name to mean different things (or
different names to mean the same thing) can often cause unnecessary confusion,
because users can no longer take what they've already learned from one API and
apply that to another.

In short, APIs are easiest to understand when field names are simple,
intuitive, and consistent with one another.

## Guidance

Field names **should** be in correct American English.

Field definitions in protobuf files **must** use `snake_case` names. These
names are mapped to an appropriate naming convention in JSON and in generated
code.

Field names **should** clearly and precisely communicate the concept being
presented and avoid overly general names that are ambiguous. That said, field
names **should** avoid including unnecessary words. In particular, avoid
including adjectives that always apply and add little cognitive value. For
example, a `proxy_settings` field might be as helpful as
`shared_proxy_settings` if there is no unshared variant.

### Consistency

APIs **should** endeavor to use the same name for the same concept and
different names for different concepts wherever possible. This includes names
across multiple APIs, in particular if those APIs are likely to be used
together.

### Repeated fields

Repeated fields **must** use the proper plural form, such as `books` or
`authors`. On the other hand, non-repeated fields **should** use the singular
form such as `book` or `author`. This implies that resource names **should**
use the singular form as well, since the field name should follow the resource
name (e.g., use `repeated Book books`, **not** `Books books = 1`).

### Prepositions

Field names **should not** include prepositions (such as "with", "for", "at",
"by", etc). For example:

- `error_reason` (**not** `reason_for_error`)
- `author` (**not** `written_by`)

It is easier for field names to match more often when following this
convention. Additionally, prepositions in field names may also indicate a
design concern, such as an overly-restrictive field or a sub-optimal data type.
This is particularly true regarding "with": a field named `book_with_publisher`
likely indicates that the book resource may be improperly structured and worth
redesigning.

**Note:** The word "per" is an exception to this rule, particularly in two
cases. Often "per" is part of a unit (e.g. "miles per hour"), in which case the
preposition must be present to accurately convey the unit. Additionally, "per"
is often appropriate in reporting scenarios (e.g. "nodes per instance" or
"failures per hour").

### Adjectives

For consistency, field names that contain both a noun and an adjective
**should** place the adjective _before_ the noun. For example:

- `collected_items` (**not** `items_collected`)
- `imported_objects` (**not** `objects_imported`)

### Booleans

Boolean fields **should** omit the prefix "is". For example:

- `disabled` (**not** `is_disabled`)
- `required` (**not** `is_required`)

**Note:** Field names that would otherwise be [reserved words](#reserved-words)
are an exception to this rule. For example, `is_new` (**not** `new`).

### Reserved words

Field names **should** avoid using names that are likely to conflict with
keywords in common programming languages, such as `new`, `class`, `function`,
`import`, etc. Reserved keywords can cause hardship for developers using the
API in that language.

### Display names

Many resources have a human-readable name, often used for display in UI. This
field **must** generally be called `display_name`, and **must not** have a
uniqueness requirement.

If an entity has an official, formal name (such as a company name or the title
of a book), an API **may** use `title` as the field name instead. The `title`
field **should not** have a uniqueness requirement.

## Further reading

- For naming resource fields, see [AIP-122][].
- For naming fields representing quantities, see [AIP-141][].
- For naming fields representing time, see [AIP-142][].

## Changelog

- **2020-01-30**: Added guidance around `display_name` and `title`.

[aip-122]: ./0122.md
[aip-141]: ./0141.md
[aip-142]: ./0142.md
