---
aip:
  id: 142
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-16
permalink: /142
redirect_from:
  - /0142
---

# Time and duration

Many services need to represent the concepts surrounding time. Representing
time can be challenging due to the intricacies of calendars and time zones, as
well as the fact that common exchange formats (such as JSON) lack a native
concept of time.

## Guidance

Fields representing time **should** use the common, generally used components
(such as [`google.protobuf.Timestamp`][timestamp] or
[`google.type.Date`][date]) for representing time or duration types. These
types are [common components][aip-213], and using them consistently allows
infrastructure and tooling to provide a better experience when interacting
with time values.

### Timestamps

Fields that represent an absolute point in time (independent of any time zone
or calendar) **should** use the [`google.protobuf.Timestamp`][timestamp] type,
(which uses UNIX timestamps under the hood and hold nanosecond precision).

These fields **should** have names ending in `_time`, such as `create_time` or
`update_time`.

Many timestamp fields refer to an activity (for example, `create_time` refers
to when the applicable resource was created). For these, the field **should**
be named with the `{imperative}_time` form. For example, if a book is being
published, the field storing the time when this happens would use the imperative
form of the verb "to publish" ("publish") resulting in a field called
`publish_time`. Fields **should not** be named using the past tense (such as
`published_time`, `created_time` or `last_updated_time`).

### Durations

Fields that represent a span between two points in time (independent of any
time zone or calendar) **should** use the
[`google.protobuf.Duration`][duration] type.

To illustrate the distinction between timestamps and durations, consider a
flight record:

```proto
// A representation of a (very incomplete) flight log.
message FlightRecord {
  // The absolute point in time when the plane took off.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp takeoff_time = 1;

  // The length (duration) of the flight, from takeoff to landing.
  google.protobuf.Duration flight_duration = 2;
}
```

**Note:** Observant readers may notice that the [timestamp][] and [duration][]
messages have the same structure (`int64 seconds` and `int32 nanos`). However,
the distinction between these is important, because they have different
semantic meaning. Additionally, tooling is able to base behavior off of which
message is used. For example, a Python-based tool could convert timestamps to
[datetime][py_datetime] objects and durations to [timedelta][py_timedelta]
objects.

### Relative time segments

In some cases, it may be necessary to represent a time segment inside a stream.
In these cases, the [`google.protobuf.Duration`][duration] type **should** be
used, and the field name **should** end with `_offset`. To ensure that the
meaning is clear, the field **must** have a comment noting the point that the
offset is relative to.

To illustrate this, consider a resource representing a segment of an audio
stream:

```proto
message AudioSegment {
  // The duration relative to the start of the stream representing the
  // beginning of the segment.
  google.protobuf.Duration start_offset = 1;
  
  // The total length of the segment.
  google.protobuf.Duration segment_duration = 2;
}
```

### Civil dates and times

Fields that represent a calendar date or wall-clock time **should** use the
appropriate common components:

- Civil date: [`google.type.Date`][date]
- Wall-clock time: [`google.type.TimeOfDay`][time_of_day]

Fields representing civil dates **should** have names ending in `_date`, while
fields representing civil times or datetimes **should** have names ending in
`_time`.

**Note:** Both the `Date` and `TimeOfDay` components are timezone-naïve. Fields
that require timezone-awareness **should** use `DateTime` (see below).

### Civil timestamps

Fields that represent a civil timestamp (date and time, optionally with a time
zone) **should** use the [`google.type.DateTime`][datetime] component, and the
field name **should** end in `_time`.

### Compatibility

Occasionally, APIs are unable to use the common structures for legacy or
compatibility reasons. For example, an API may conform to a separate
specification that mandates that timestamps be integers or [ISO-8601][]
strings.

In these situations, fields **may** use other types. If possible, the following
naming conventions apply:

- For integers, include the meaning (examples: `time`, `duration`, `delay`,
  `latency`) **and** the unit of measurement (valid values: `seconds`,
  `millis`, `micros`, `nanos`) as a final suffix. For example, `send_time_millis`.
- For strings, include the meaning (examples: `time`, `duration`, `delay`,
  `latency`) but no unit suffix.

In all cases, clearly document the expected format, and the rationale for its
use.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-213]: ./0213.md
[date]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/type/date.proto
[datetime]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis/blob/master/google/type/datetime.proto
[duration]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/duration.proto
[iso-8601]: https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html
[py_datetime]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.datetime
[py_timedelta]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.timedelta
[time_of_day]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/type/timeofday.proto
[timestamp]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/timestamp.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
