---
aip:
  id: 151
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-25
permalink: /151
redirect_from:
  - /0151
---

# Long-running operations

Occasionally, an API may need to expose a method that takes a significant
amount of time to complete. In these situations, it is often a poor user
experience to simply block while the task runs; rather, it is better to return
some kind of promise to the user and allow the user to check back in later.

The long-running operations pattern is roughly analogous to a [Python
`Future`][], or a [Node.js `Promise`][]. Essentially, the user is given a token
that can be used to track progress and retrieve the result.

## Guidance

Individual API methods that might take a significant amount of time to complete
**should** return a [`google.longrunning.Operation`][lro] object instead of the
ultimate response message.

```proto
// Write a book.
rpc WriteBook(WriteBookRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books}:write"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "WriteBookResponse"
    metadata_type: "WriteBookMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The response type **must** be `google.longrunning.Operation`. The `Operation`
  proto definition **must not** be copied into individual APIs.
- The method **must** include a `google.longrunning.operation_info` annotation
  defining the response and metadata types.
  - The response and metadata types **must** be defined in the file where the
    RPC appears, or a file imported by that file.
  - If the response and metadata types are defined in another package, the
    fully-qualified message name **must** be used.
  - The response type **should not** be `google.protobuf.Empty` (except for
    [`Delete`][aip-135] methods), unless it is certain that response data will
    _never_ be needed. If response data might be added in the future, define an
    empty message for the RPC response and use that.
  - The metadata type is used to provide information such as progress, partial
    failures, and similar information on each `GetOperation` call. It **should
    not** be `google.protobuf.Empty`, unless it is certain that metadata will
    _never_ be needed. If metadata might be added in the future, define an
    empty message for the RPC metadata and use that.
- APIs with messages that return `Operation` **must** implement the
  [`Operations`][lro] service. Individual APIs **must not** define their own
  interfaces for long-running operations to avoid inconsistency.

**Note:** User expectations can vary on what is considered "a significant
amount of time" depending on what work is being done. A good rule of thumb is
10 seconds.

### Standard methods

APIs **may** return an `Operation` from the [`Create`][aip-133],
[`Update`][aip-134], or [`Delete`][aip-135] standard methods if appropriate. In
this case, the response type in the `operation_info` annotation **must** be the
standard and expected response type for that standard method.

When creating or deleting a resource with a long-running operation, the
resource **should** be included in [`List`][aip-132] and [`Get`][aip-131]
calls; however, the resource **should** indicate that it is not usable,
generally with a [state enum][aip-216].

### Expiration

APIs **may** allow their operation resources to expire after sufficient time
has elapsed after the operation completed.

**Note:** A good rule of thumb for operation expiry is 30 days.

### Errors

Errors that prevent a long-running operation from _starting_ **must** return an
error response ([AIP-193][]), similar to any other method.

Errors that occur over the course of an operation **may** be placed in the
metadata message. The errors themselves **must** still be represented with a
[`google.rpc.Status`][] object.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-133]: ./0133.md
[aip-134]: ./0134.md
[aip-135]: ./0135.md
[aip-193]: ./0193.md
[aip-216]: ./0216.md
[`google.rpc.Status`]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/rpc/status.proto
[lro]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/longrunning/operations.proto
[node.js `promise`]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises
[python `future`]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html#concurrent.futures.Future
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

## Changelog

- **2019-11-22**: Added a short explanation of what `metadata_type` is for.
- **2019-09-23**: Added guidance on errors.
- **2019-08-23**: Added guidance about fully-qualified message names when the
  message name is in another package.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
