---
aip:
  id: 153
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-12-16
permalink: /153
redirect_from:
  - /0153
---

# Import and export

Many users want to be able to load data into an API, or get their existing data
out of an API. This is particularly important for enterprise users, who are
often concerned about vendor lock.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support import and export operations, which **may** create
multiple new resources, or they **may** populate data into a single resource.

### Multiple resources

Services **should** implement a common pattern for importing and exporting
multiple resources into or out of an API:

```proto
rpc ImportBooks(ImportBooksRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:import"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "ImportBooksResponse"
    metadata_type: "ImportBooksMetadata"
  };
}

rpc ExportBooks(ExportBooksRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:export"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "ExportBooksResponse"
    metadata_type: "ExportBooksMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The method **must** return a long-running operation (see [AIP-151][]) unless
  the service can guarantee that it will _never_ need more than a few seconds
  to complete.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`, and the `body` **must** be `"*"`.
- A `parent` field **should** be included as part of the URI.
  - If importing into or exporting from multiple resources is required, the API
    **should** keep the `parent` field and allow the user to use the `-`
    character to indicate multiple parents (see [AIP-159][]).
  - On import, if the user provides a specific parent, the API **must** reject
    any imported resources that would be added to a different parent.
- The URI suffix **should** be `:import` or `:export`.

### Data for a single resource

Services **should** implement a common pattern for importing or export data
into or out of a single resource:

```proto
rpc ImportPages(ImportPagesRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{book=publishers/*/books/*}:importPages"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "ImportPagesResponse"
    metadata_type: "ImportPagesMetadata"
  };
}

rpc ExportPages(ExportPagesRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{book=publishers/*/books/*}:exportPages"
    body: "*"
  };
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "ExportPagesResponse"
    metadata_type: "ExportPagesMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The method **must** return a long-running operation (see [AIP-151][]) unless
  the service can guarantee that it will _never_ need more than a few seconds
  to complete.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`, and the `body` **must** be `"*"`.
- A field representing the resource that data is being imported into **should**
  be included as part of the URI. The field **should** be named after the
  resource (and **should not** be called `name`).
- The URI suffix should include both the verb and a noun for the data itself,
  such as `:importPages` or `:exportPages`.

### Request object

Imports and exports often require two fundamentally different types of
configuration:

1. Configuration specific to the source or destination.
2. Congiguration regarding the imported or exported data itself.

Source or destination configuration should be grouped into a single message and
placed inside a oneof:

```proto
message ImportBooksRequest {
  string parent = 1;
  oneof source {
    AuthorSource author_source = 2;
    TranslatorSource translator_source = 3;
  }
  string isbn_prefix = 4;
}

message ExportBooksRequest {
  string parent = 1;
  oneof destination {
    PrinterDestination printer_destination = 2;
    TranslatorDestination translator_destination = 3;
  }
  string filter = 4;
}
```

- The source configuration messages **must** be placed within a `oneof source`
  (for import) or `oneof destination` (for export), even if there is only one.
  (This maintains flexibility to add more later.)
- Configuration related to the data itself (and therefore common across all
  sources) **must** be placed at the top-level of the request message.

**Note:** The configuration for import and export **may** be different from one
another. (For example, it would be sensible to import from a file but export to
a directory.)

### Inline sources

APIs **may** also permit import and export "inline", where the contents to be
imported or exported are provided in the request or response.

```proto
message InlineSource {
  repeated Book books = 1;
}
```

- The source or destination **should** be named `InlineSource` or
  `InlineDestination`.
- The message **should** include a repeated field representing the resource.
  However, if the resource structure is complex, the API **may** use a separate
  inline representation. In this situation, the same format **must** be used
  for both import and export.

### Partial failures

While partial failures are normally discouraged, import and export RPCs
**should** include partial failure information in the metadata object. Each
individual error **should** be a `google.rpc.Status` object describing the
error. For more on errors, see [AIP-193][].

[aip-151]: ./0151.md
[aip-159]: ./0159.md
[aip-193]: ./0193.md
[google bigquery]: https://cloud.google.com/bigquery
[google storage]: https://cloud.google.com/storage
