---
aip:
  id: 154
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-24
permalink: /154
redirect_from:
  - /0154
---

# Resource freshness validation

APIs often need to validate that a client and server agree on the current state
of a resource before taking some kind of action on that resource. For example,
two processes updating the same resource in parallel could create a race
condition, where the latter process "stomps over" the effort of the former one.

ETags provide a way to deal with this, by allowing the server to send a
checksum based on the current content of a resource; when the client sends that
checksum back, the server can ensure that the checksums match before acting on
the request.

## Guidance

A resource **may** include an `etag` field on any resource where it is
important to ensure that the client has an up to date resource before acting on
certain requests:

```proto
// A representation of a book.
message Book {
  // Other fields...

  // This checksum is computed by the server based on the value of other
  // fields, and may be sent on update and delete requests to ensure the
  // client has an up-to-date value before proceeding.
  string etag = 99;
}
```

- The etag field **must** be a string, and **must** be named `etag`.
- The etag field **should not** be given any behavior annotations
  ([AIP-203][aip-203]).
- The etag field **must** be provided by the server on output, and values
  **should** conform to [RFC 7232][].
- If a user sends back an etag which matches the current etag value, the
  service **must** permit the request (unless there is some other reason for
  failure).
- If a user sends back an etag which does not match the current etag value, the
  service **must** send a `FAILED_PRECONDITION` error response.
- If the user does not send an etag value at all, the service **should** permit
  the request. However, services with strong consistency or parallelism
  requirements **may** require users to send etags all the time and reject the
  request with an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error in this case.

**Note:** ETag values **should** include quotes as described in [RFC 7232][].
For example, a valid etag is `"foo"`, not `foo`.

### Strong and weak etags

ETags can be either "strongly validated" or "weakly validated":

- A strongly validated etag means that two resources bearing the same etag are
  byte-for-byte identical.
- A weakly validated etag means that two resources bearing the same etag are
  equivalent, but may differ in ways that the service does not consider to be
  important.

Resources **may** use either strong or weak etags, as it sees fit, but
**should** document the behavior. Additionally, weak etags **must** have a `W/`
prefix as mandated by [RFC 7232][].

[aip-203]: ./0203.md
[rfc 7232]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7232#section-2.3

## Further reading

- For which error codes to retry, see [AIP-194](https://aip.dev/194).
- For how to retry errors in client libraries, see [AIP-4221](https://aip.dev/4221).

## Changelog

- **2019-09-23**: Changed the title to "resource freshness validation".
