---
aip:
  id: 155
  state: approved
  created: 2019-05-06
permalink: /155
redirect_from:
  - /0155
---

# Request identification

It is sometimes useful for an API to have a unique, customer-provided
identifier for particular requests. This can be useful for several purposes,
such as de-duplicating requests from parallel processes, ensuring the safety of
retries, or auditing.

The most important purpose for request IDs is to provide idempotency
guarantees: allowing the same request to be issued more than once without
subsequent calls having any effect. In the event of a network failure, the
client can retry the request, and the server can detect duplication and ensure
that the request is only processed once.

## Guidance

APIs **may** add a `string request_id` parameter to request messages (including
those of standard methods) in order to uniquely identify particular requests.

```proto
message CreateBookRequest {
  // The parent resource where this book will be created.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  string parent = 1;

  // The book to create.
  Book book = 2;

  // A unique identifier for this request. Restricted to 36 ASCII characters.
  // A random UUID is recommended.
  // This request is only idempotent if a `request_id` is provided.
  string request_id = 3;
}
```

- Providing a request ID **must** guarantee idempotency.
  - If a duplicate request is detected, the server **should** return the
    response for the previously successful request, because the client most
    likely did not receive the previous response.
  - APIs **may** choose any reasonable timeframe for honoring request IDs.
- The `request_id` field **must** be provided on the request message to which
  it applies (and it **must not** be a field on resources themselves).
- Request IDs **should** be optional.
- Request IDs **should** be able to be UUIDs, and **may** allow UUIDs to be the
  only valid format. The format restrictions for request IDs **must** be
  documented.

### Stale success responses

In some unusual situations, it may not be possible to return an identical
success response. For example, a duplicate request to create a resource may
arrive after the resource has not only been created, but subsequently updated;
because the service has no other need to retain the historical data, it is no
longer feasible to return an identical success response.

In this situation, the method **may** return the current state of the resource
instead. In other words, it is permissible to substitute the historical success
response with a similar response that reflects more current data.

## Further reading

- For which codes to retry, see [AIP-194](https://aip.dev/194).
- For how to retry errors in client libraries, see [AIP-4221](https://aip.dev/4221).

## Changelog

- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
