---
aip:
  id: 157
  state: approved
  created: 2019-01-26
permalink: /157
redirect_from:
  - /0157
---

# Partial responses

Sometimes, a resource can be either large or expensive to compute, and the API
needs to give the user control over which fields it sends back.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support partial responses in one of two ways (but the same API
**must not** use both):

### View enumeration

View enums are useful for situations where an API only wants to expose a small
number of permutations to the user:

```proto
enum BookView {
  // The default / unset value.
  // The API will default to the BASIC view.
  BOOK_VIEW_UNSPECIFIED = 0;

  // Include basic metadata about the book, but not the full contents.
  // This is the default value (for both ListBooks and GetBook).
  BASIC = 1;

  // Include everything.
  FULL = 2;
}
```

- The enum **should** be specified as a `view` field on List/Get RPC requests.
- The enum **should** be named something ending in `-View`
- The enum **should** at minimum have values named `BASIC` and `FULL` (although
  it **may** have values other than these).
- The `UNSPECIFIED` value **must** be valid (not an error), and the API
  **must** document what the unspecified value will do).
  - For List RPCs, the effective default value **should** be `BASIC`.
  - For Get RPCs, the effective default value **should** be either `BASIC` or
    `FULL`.
- The enum **should** be defined at the top level of the proto file (as it is
  needed in both the Get and List request).
- APIs **may** add fields to a given view over time. APIs **must not** remove a
  field from a given view (this is a breaking change).

### Read masks

Read masks are useful for granting the user fine-grained control over what
fields are returned, and are specified as a single field on the request
message: `google.protobuf.FieldMask read_mask`.

- The field mask **must** be a `google.protobuf.FieldMask` and **should** be
  named `read_mask`.
- The field mask **should** be optional, and the API **should** provide and
  document an appropriate default if the field mask is not provided.
  - An explicit value of `"*"` **should** be supported, and **must** return all
    fields.
  - The default value **may** be something other than `"*"` (for example, if
    certain fields are expensive to compute and it is preferable to exclude
    them by default).
  - The field mask **may** be designated as required if necessary.
  - The default for List and Get **may** be different from each other. However,
    if they are, the default for Get **must** be a (non-strict) superset of the
    default for List.
- An API **may** allow read masks with non-terminal repeated fields (unlike
  update masks), but is not obligated to do so.

### Choosing a strategy

Individual APIs have their own needs, and a partial response strategy that is
appropriate for one API may not be appropriate for another. However, generally
APIs **should not** be providing resource views unless they are truly needed.

#### Benefits of view enums

- View enums allow an API to present the user with a limited number of
  choices, and are useful when presenting fine-grained control will be
  cumbersome, or in situations where the additional information returned
  represents a different tier of service.
- View enums allow the API to add fields to each view over time, if desired.
- View enums usually require less upkeep for users.
- View enums are effective when the API knows which fields are expensive to
  compute, and that this cost will not significantly change over time.

#### Benefits of read masks

- Read masks allow the user fine-grained control, and are ideal when the user
  wants to get precisely a certain set of fields back, and there are too many
  combinations to reasonably represent with view enums.
- Read masks are beneficial when separate fields are independently expensive
  to compute, and an API wants to send back only the subset that the user
  needs.

**Note:** If an API requires partial responses, it **should** generally decide
to either support view enums or read masks across the board, but not mix and
match. If an API does support both, it **must not** support both a view and a
read mask on the same resource.
