---
aip:
  id: 158
  state: approved
  created: 2019-02-18
permalink: /158
redirect_from:
  - /0158
---

# Pagination

APIs often need to provide collections of data, most commonly in the [List][]
standard method. However, collections can often be arbitrarily sized, and also
often grow over time, increasing lookup time as well as the size of the
responses being sent over the wire. Therefore, it is important that collections
be paginated.

## Guidance

RPCs returning collections of data **must** provide pagination _at the outset_,
as it is a [backwards-incompatible change](#backwards-compatibility) to add
pagination to an existing method.

```proto
// The request structure for listing books.
message ListBooksRequest {
  // The parent, which owns this collection of books.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  string parent = 1;

  // The maximum number of books to return. The service may return fewer than
  // this value.
  // If unspecified, at most 50 books will be returned.
  // The maximum value is 1000; values above 1000 will be coerced to 1000.
  int32 page_size = 2;

  // A page token, received from a previous `ListBooks` call.
  // Provide this to retrieve the subsequent page.
  //
  // When paginating, all other parameters provided to `ListBooks` must match
  // the call that provided the page token.
  string page_token = 3;
}

// The response structure from listing books.
message ListBooksResponse {
  // The books from the specified publisher.
  repeated Book books = 1;

  // A token that can be sent as `page_token` to retrieve the next page.
  // If this field is omitted, there are no subsequent pages.
  string next_page_token = 2;
}
```

- Request messages for collections **should** define an `int32 page_size`
  field, allowing users to specify the maximum number of results to return.
  - If the user does not specify `page_size` (or specifies `0`), the API
    chooses an appropriate default, which the API **should** document.
  - If the user specifies `page_size` greater than the maximum permitted by the
    API, the API **should** coerce down to the maximum permitted page size.
  - If the user specifies a negative value for `page_size`, the API **must**
    send an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` error.
  - The API **may** return fewer results than the number requested (including
    zero results), even if not at the end of the collection.
- Request messages for collections **should** define a `string page_token`
  field, allowing users to advance to the next page in the collection.
  - If the user changes the `page_size` in a request for subsequent pages, the
    service **must** honor the new page size.
  - The user is expected to keep all other arguments to the RPC the same; if
    any arguments are different, the API **should** send an `INVALID_ARGUMENT`
    error.
- Response messages for collections **should** define a
  `string next_page_token` field, providing the user with a page token that may
  be used to retrieve the next page.
  - The field containing pagination results **should** be the first field in
    the message and have a field number of `1`. It **should** be a repeated
    field containing a list of resources constituting a single page of results.
  - If the end of the collection has been reached, the `next_page_token` field
    **must** be empty. This is the _only_ way to communicate
    "end-of-collection" to users.
  - If the end of the collection has not been reached (or if the API can not
    determine in time), the API **must** provide a `next_page_token`.
- Response messages for collections **may** provide an `int32 total_size`
  field, providing the user with the total number of items in the list.
  - This total **may** be an estimate (but the API **should** explicitly
    document that).

### Opacity

Page tokens provided by APIs **must** be opaque (but URL-safe) strings, and
**must not** be user-parseable. This is because if users are able to
deconstruct these, _they will do so_. This effectively makes the implementation
details of your API's pagination become part of the API surface, and it becomes
impossible to update those details without breaking users.

**Warning:** Base-64 encoding an otherwise-transparent page token is **not** a
sufficient obfuscation mechanism.

For page tokens which do not need to be stored in a database, and which do not
contain sensitive data, an API **may** obfuscate the page token by defining an
internal protocol buffer message with any data needed, and send the serialized
proto, base-64 encoded.

### Expiring page tokens

Many APIs store page tokens in a database internally. In this situation, APIs
**may** expire page tokens a reasonable time after they have been sent, in
order not to needlessly store large amounts of data that is unlikely to be
used. It is not necessary to document this behavior.

**Note:** While a reasonable time may vary between APIs, a good rule of thumb
is three days.

## Backwards compatibility

Adding pagination to an existing RPC is a backwards-incompatible change. This
may seem strange; adding fields to proto messages is generally backwards
compatible. However, this change is _behaviorally_ incompatible.

Consider a user whose collection has 75 resources, and who has already written
and deployed code. If the API later adds pagination fields, and sets the
default to 50, then that user's code breaks; it was getting all resources, and
now is only getting the first 50 (and does not know to advance pagination).
Even if the API set a higher default limit, such as 100, the user's collection
could grow, and _then_ the code would break.

For this reason, it is important to always add pagination to RPCs returning
collections _up front_; they are consistently important, and they can not be
added later without causing problems for existing users.

**Warning:** This also entails that, in addition to presenting the pagination
fields, they **must** be _actually implemented_ with a non-infinite default
value. Implementing an in-memory version (which might fetch everything then
paginate) is reasonable for initially-small collections.

[list]: ./0132.md

## Changelog

- **2019-02-12**: Added guidance on the field being paginated over.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
- **2019-07-19**: Update the opacity requirement from "should" to "must".
