---
aip:
  id: 159
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-07-26
permalink: /159
redirect_from:
  - /0159
---

# Reading across collections

Sometimes, it is useful for a user to be able to retrieve resources across
multiple collections, or retrieve a single resource without needing to know
what collection it is in.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support reading resources across multiple collections by allowing
users to specify a `-` as a wildcard character in a standard [`List`][aip-132]
method:

```
GET /v1/shelves/-/books?filter=...
```

- The URL pattern **must** still be specified with `*` and permit the
  collection to be specified; a URL pattern **must not** hard-code the `-`
  character.
- The method **must** explicitly document that this behavior is supported.
- The resources provided in the response **must** use the canonical name of the
  resource, with the actual parrent collection identifiers (instead of `-`).

**Important:** This pattern **must not** be used for location-bound resources
to search across locations. Retrieving resources across locations adds
additional failure modes that require special handling.

### Unique resource lookup

Sometimes, a resource within a sub-collection has an identifier that is unique
across parent collections. In this case, it may be useful to allow a
[`Get`][aip-131] method to retrieve that resource without knowing which parent
collection contains it. In such cases, APIs **may** allow users to specify the
wildcard collection ID `-` for all parent collections within which the resource
is unique:

```
GET https://example.googleapis.com/v1/shelves/-/books/{book}
```

- The URL pattern **must** still be specified with `*` and permit the
  collection to be specified; a URL pattern **must not** hard-code the `-`
  character.
- The method **must** explicitly document that this behavior is supported.
- The resource name in the response **must** use the canonical name of the
  resource, with actual parent collection identifiers (instead of `-`). For
  example, the request above returns a resource with a name like
  `shelves/123/books/456`, _not_ `shelves/-/books/456`.

[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
