---
aip:
  id: 162
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-09-17
permalink: /162
redirect_from:
  - /0162
---

# Resource Revisions

Some APIs need to have resources with a revision history, where users can
reason about the state of the resource over time. There are several reasons for
this:

- Users may want to be able to roll back to a previous revision, or diff
  against a previous revision.
- An API may create data which is derived in some way from a resource at a
  given point in time. In these cases, it may be desirable to snapshot the
  resource for reference later.

**Note:** We use the word _revision_ to refer to a historical reference for a
particular resource, and intentionally avoid the term _version_, which refers
to the version of an API as a whole.

## Guidance

APIs **may** store a revision history for a resource if it is useful to users.

APIs implementing resources with a revision history **must** provide a
`revision_id` field on the resource:

```proto
message Book {
  // The name of the book.
  string name = 1;

  // Other fields…

  // The revision ID of the book.
  // A new revision is committed whenever the book is changed in any way.
  // The format is an 8-character hexadecimal string.
  string revision_id = 5 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = IMMUTABLE,
    (google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];

  // The timestamp that the revision was created.
  google.protobuf.Timestamp revision_create_time = 6
    [(google.api.field_behavior) = OUTPUT_ONLY];
}
```

- The resource **must** contain a `revision_id` field, which **should** be a
  string and contain a short, automatically-generated random string. A good
  rule of thumb is the last eight characters of a UUID4.
  - The `revision_id` field **must** document when new revisions are created
    (see [committing revisions](#committing-revisions) below).
  - The `revision_id` field **should** document the format of revision IDs.
- The resource **must** contain a `revision_create_time` field, which
  **should** be a `google.protobuf.Timestamp` (see [AIP-142][]).

**Note:** A randomly generated string is preferred over other methods, such as
an auto-incrementing integer, because there is often a need to delete or revert
revisions, and a randomly generated string holds up better in those situations.

### Referencing revisions

When it is necessary to refer to a specific revision of a resource, APIs
**must** use the following syntax: `{resource_name}@{revision_id}`. For
example:

    publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8

**Note:** The `@` character is selected because it is the only character
permitted by [RFC 1738 §2.2][] for special meaning within a URI scheme that is
not already used elsewhere.

APIs **should** generally accept a resource reference at a particular revision
in any place where they ordinarily accept the resource name. However, they
**must not** accept a revision in situations that mutate the resource, and
should error with `INVALID_ARGUMENT` if one is given.

**Important:** APIs **must not** require a revision ID, and **must** default to
the current revision if one is not provided, except in methods specifically
dealing with the revision history (such as rollback) where failing to require
it would not make sense (or lead to dangerous mistakes).

### Getting a revision

APIs implementing resource revisions **should** accept a resource name with a
revision ID in the standard `Get` method ([AIP-131][]):

```proto
message GetBookRequest {
  // The name of the book.
  //   Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables
  //
  // In order to retrieve a previous revision of the book, also provide
  // the revision ID.
  //   Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8
  string name = 1;
}
```

If the user passes a revision ID that does not exist, the API **must** fail
with a `NOT_FOUND` error.

APIs **must** return a `name` value corresponding to what the user sent. If the
user sent a name with no revision ID, the returned `name` string **must not**
include the revision ID either. Similarly, if the user sent a name with a
revision ID, the returned `name` string **must** explicitly include it.

### Tagging revisions

APIs implementing resource revisions **may** provide a mechanism for users to
tag a specific revision with a user provided name by implementing a "Tag
Revision" custom method:

```proto
rpc TagBookRevision(TagBookRevisionRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:tagRevision"
    body: "*"
  }
}
```

```proto
message TagBookRevisionRequest {
  // The name of the book to be tagged, including the revision ID.
  string name = 1;

  // The tag to apply.
  // The tag should be at most 40 characters, and match `[a-z][a-z0-9-]{3,39}`.
  string tag = 2;
}
```

- The `name` field **should** require an explicit revision ID to be provided.
- Once a revision is tagged, the API **must** support using the tag in place of
  the revision ID in `name` fields.
  - If the user sends a tag, the API **must** return the tag in the resource's
    `name` field, but the revision ID in the resource's `revision_id` field.
  - If the user sends a revision ID, the API **must** return the revision ID in
    both the `name` field and the `revision_id` field.
- If the user calls the `Tag` method with an existing tag, the request **must**
  succeed and the tag updated to point to the new requested revision ID. This
  allows users to write code against specific tags (e.g. `published`) and the
  revision can change in the background with no code change.

### Listing revisions

APIs implementing resource revisions **should** provide a custom method for
listing the revision history for a resource, with a structure similar to
standard `List` methods ([AIP-132][]):

```proto
rpc ListBookRevisions(ListBookRevisionsRequest)
    returns (ListBookRevisionsResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    get: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:listRevisions"
  }
}
```

```proto
message ListBookRevisionsRequest {
  // The name of the book to list revisions for.
  string name = 1;

  // The maximum number of revisions to return per page.
  int32 page_size = 2;

  // The page token, received from a previous ListBookRevisions call.
  // Provide this to retrieve the subsequent page.
  string page_token = 3;
}

message ListBookRevisionsResponse {
  // The revisions of the book.
  repeated Book books = 1;

  // A token that can be sent as `page_token` to retrieve the next page.
  // If this field is omitted, there are no subsequent pages.
  string next_page_token = 2;
}
```

While revision listing methods are mostly similar to standard `List` methods
([AIP-132][]), the following important differences apply:

- The first field in the request message **must** be called `name` rather than
  `parent` (this is listing revisions for a specific book, not a collection of
  books).
- The URI **must** end with `:listRevisions`.
- Revisions **must** be ordered in reverse chronological order. An `order_by`
  field **should not** be provided.
- The returned resources **must** include an explicit revision ID in the
  resource's `name` field.
  - If providing the full resource is expensive or infeasible, the revision
    object **may** only populate the `string name`, `string revision_id`, and
    `google.protobuf.Timestamp revision_create_time` fields instead. The
    `string name` field **must** include the resource name and an explicit
    revision ID, which can be used for an explicit `Get` request. The API
    **must** document that it will do this.

### Child resources

Resources with a revision history **may** have child resources. If they do,
there are two potential variants:

- Child resources where each child resource is a child of the parent resource
  as a whole.
- Child resources where each child resource is a child of _a single revision
  of_ the parent resource.

If a child resource is a child of a single revision, the child resource's name
**must** always explicitly include the parent's resource ID:

    publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8/pages/42

In `List` requests for such resources, the service **should** default to the
latest revision of the parent if the user does not specify one, but **must**
explicitly include the parent's revision ID in the `name` field of resources in
the response.

If necessary, APIs **may** explicitly support listing child resources across
parent revisions by accepting the `@-` syntax. For example:

    GET /v1/publishers/123/books/les-miserables@-/pages

APIs **should not** include multiple levels of resources with revisions, as
this quickly becomes difficult to reason about.

### Committing revisions

Depending on the resource, different APIs may have different strategies for
when to commit a new revision, such as:

- Commit a new revision any time that there is a change
- Commit a new revision when something important happens
- Commit a new revision when the user specifically asks

APIs **may** use any of these strategies. APIs that want to commit a revision
on user request **should** handle this with a `Commit` custom method:

```proto
rpc CommitBook(CommitBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:commit"
    body: "*"
  }
}
```

- The method **must** use the `POST` HTTP verb.
- The method **should** return the resource, and the resource name **must**
  include the revision ID.
- The request message **must** include the `name` field.

### Rollback

A common use case for a resource with a revision history is the ability to roll
back to a given revision. APIs **should** handle this with a `Rollback` custom
method:

```proto
rpc RollbackBook(RollbackBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:rollback"
    body: "*"
  }
}
```

- The method **must** use the `POST` HTTP verb.
- The method **should** return the resource, and the resource name **must**
  include the revision ID.

```proto
message RollbackBookRequest {
  // The book being rolled back.
  string name = 1;

  // The revision ID to roll back to.
  // It must be a revision of the same book.
  //
  //   Example: c7cfa2a8
  string revision_id = 2;
}
```

- The request message **must** include a `revision_id` field.
  - The API **must** fail the request with `NOT_FOUND` if the revision does not
    exist on that resource.

**Note:** When rolling back, the API should return a _new_ revision of the
resource with a _new_ revision ID, rather than reusing the original ID. This
avoids problems with representing the same revision being active for multiple
ranges of time.

### Deleting revisions

Revisions are sometimes expensive to store, and there are valid use cases to
want to remove one or more revisions from a resource's revision history.

APIs **may** define a method to delete revisions, with a structure similar to
`Delete` ([AIP-135][]) methods:

```proto
rpc DeleteBookRevision(DeleteBookRevisionRequest)
    returns (google.protobuf.Empty) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    delete: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:deleteRevision"
  }
}
```

```proto
message DeleteBookRevisionRequest {
  // The name of the book revision to be deleted, with a revision ID explicitly
  // included.
  //
  // Example: publishers/123/books/les-miserables@c7cfa2a8
  string name = 1;
}
```

- The explicit resource ID **must** be required (the method **must** fail with
  `INVALID_ARGUMENT` if it is not provided, and **must not** default to the
  latest revision).
- The API **must not** overload the `DeleteBook` method to serve both purposes
  (this could lead to dangerous or confusing mistakes).
- If the resource supports soft delete, then revisions of that resource
  **should** also support soft delete.

## Appendix: Character Collision

Most resource names have a restrictive set of characters, but some are very
open. For example, Google Cloud Storage allows the `@` character in filenames,
which are part of the resource name, and therefore uses the `#` character to
indicate a revision.

APIs **should** avoid permitting the `@` character in resource names, and if
APIs that do permit it need to support resources with revisions, they
**should** pick an appropriate separator depending on how and where the API is
used, and **must** clearly document it.

[aip-131]: ./0131.md
[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-135]: ./0135.md
[aip-142]: ./0142.md
[rfc 1738 §2.2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1738
