---
aip:
  id: 165
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-12-18
permalink: /165
redirect_from:
  - /0165
---

# Criteria-based delete

Occasionally, an API may need to provide a mechanism to delete a large number
of resources based on some set of filter parameters, rather than requiring the
individual resource name of the resources to be deleted.

This is a rare case, reserved for situations where users need to delete
thousands or more resources at once, in which case the normal Batch Delete
pattern ([AIP-235][]) becomes unwieldy and inconvenient.

## Guidance

**Important:** Most APIs **should** use only Delete ([AIP-135][]) or Batch
Delete ([AIP-235][]) for deleting resources, and **should not** implement
deleting based on criteria. This is because deleting is generally irreversible
and this type of operation makes it easy for a user to accidentally lose data
significant amounts of data.

An API **may** implement a Purge method to permit deleting a large number of
resources based on a filter string; however, this **should** only be done if
the Batch Delete ([AIP-235][]) pattern is insufficient to accomplish the
desired goal:

```proto
rpc PurgeBooks(PurgeBooksRequest) returns (google.longrunning.Operation) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:purge"
    body: "*"
  }
  option (google.longrunning.operation_info) = {
    response_type: "PurgeBooksResponse"
    metadata_type: "PurgeBooksMetadata"
  };
}
```

- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`, and the `body` **must** be `"*"`.
- The `parent` field **should** be included in the URI. If the API wishes to
  support deletion across multiple parents, it **should** accept the `-`
  character consistent with [AIP-159][].
- The response type **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` (see
  [AIP-151][]).

### Request message

Purge methods implement a common request message pattern:

```proto
message PurgeBooksRequest {
  // The publisher to purge books from.
  // To purge books across publishers, send "publishers/-".
  string parent = 1 [
    (google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED,
    (google.api.resource_reference) = {
      child_type: "library-example.googleapis.com/Book"
    }];

  // A filter matching the books to be purged.
  string filter = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];

  // Actually perform the purge.
  // If `force` is set to false, the method will return a sample of
  // resource names that would be deleted.
  bool force = 3;
}
```

- The `filter` field **should** be required, and **must** follow the same
  semantics as in List methods (see [AIP-132][]).
- The `force` field **must** be included. If it is not set, the API **must**
  return a count of the resources that would be deleted as well as a sample of
  those resources, without actually performing the deletion.

### Response message

Purge methods implement a common response message pattern:

```proto
message PurgeBooksResponse {
  // The number of books that this request deleted (or, if `force` is false,
  // the number of books that will be deleted).
  int32 purge_count = 1;

  // A sample of the resource names of books that will be deleted.
  // Only populated if `force` is set to false.
  repeated string purge_sample = 2;
}
```

- The `purge_count` field **should** be included, and provide the number of
  resources that were deleted (or would be deleted). This count **may** be an
  estimate similar to `total_size` in [AIP-158][] (but the service **should**
  document this if so).
- The `purge_sample` field **should** be included: If `force` is `false`, it
  **should** provide a sample of resource names that will be deleted. If
  `force` is true, this field **should not** be populated.
  - The sample **should** be a sufficient size to catch clearly obvious
    mistakes: A good rule of thumb is 100. The API **should** document the
    size, and **should** document that it is a maximum (it is possible to send
    fewer).
  - The sample **may** be random or **may** be deterministic (such as the first
    matched resource names). The API **should** document which approach is
    used.

**Note:** Even if `purge_count` and `purge_sample` are not included, the
`force` field **must** still be included in the request.

[aip-132]: ./0132.md
[aip-135]: ./0135.md
[aip-151]: ./0151.md
[aip-158]: ./0158.md
[aip-159]: ./0159.md
[aip-235]: ./0235.md
