---
aip:
  id: 166
  state: reviewing
  created: 2020-06-24
permalink: /166
redirect_from:
  - /0166
---

# Hierarchically-derived resources

Services occasionally have resources where the resource's effective values are
determined by consulting both values on the resource as well as values
elsewhere, such as a parent in the hierarchy, and "flattening" them together.

This is most common for policies, which could be applied against a resource, a
collection of resources, or a "container" resource (such as a project or
organization).

In these situations, users need to distinguish between properties applied to
the resource directly and properties that are inherited.

## Guidance

Services **should** return only field values on the resource when responding to
`Get` and `List` methods by default.

Additionally, services **may** add a field to `Get` and `List` requests that
allows the user to opt-in to receiving the effective configuration instead:

```proto
message GetBookRequest {
  // The name of the book.
  string name = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
  }];

  // If true, values that are set on other objects in the hierachy and
  // inherited by the book will be included.
  // If false (default), only fields directly set on the book are included.
  bool effective = 2;
}
```

Services **must not** add this field for cases where determining the effective
values is expensive.

**Note:** Services **may** make it cheap to load effective values by utilizing
eventual consistency for inherited values. However, services **should** ensure
that values set directly on the resource being queried are strongly consistent.

### Expensive computations

On rare occasion, the effective values for a resource can be expensive to
compute and not referenced often. Additionally, a service might need to charge
for the query.

In these situations, the service **may** provide a specialized method:

```proto
rpc ComputeEffectiveBook(ComputeEffectiveBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:computeEffective"
    body: "*"
  };
}

message ComputeEffectiveBookRequest {
  // The name of the book.
  string name = 1 [(google.api.resource_reference) = {
    type: "library.googleapis.com/Book"
  }];
}
```

- The method **should** return the resource instead of a custom response
  object.
  - The method **may** return a long-running operation if appropriate (see
    [AIP-151][]); the long-running operation **should** resolve to the
    resource.
  - The `name` field **should** be populated with the queried resource.
- The request message **may** include other fields if appropriate.
- The result **should** be strongly consistent in these cases.

[aip-151]: ./0151.md
