---
aip:
  id: 180
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-23
permalink: /180
redirect_from:
  - /0180
---

# Backwards compatibility

APIs are fundamentally contracts with users, and users often write code against
APIs that is then launched into a production service with the expectation that
it continues to work (unless the API has a [stability level][aip-181] that
indicates otherwise). Therefore, it is important to understand what constitutes
a backwards compatible change and what constitutes a backwards incompatible
change.

## Guidance

Existing client code **must not** be broken by a service updating to a new
minor or patch release. Old clients **must** be able to work against newer
servers (with the same major version number).

**Important:** It is not always clear whether a change is compatible or not.
The guidance here **should** be treated as indicative, rather than as a
comprehensive list of every possible change.

There are three distinct types of compatibility to consider:

1. Source compatibility: Code written against a previous version **must**
   compile against a newer version, and successfully run with a newer version
   of the client library.
2. Wire compatibility: Code written against a previous version **must** be able
   to communicate correctly with a newer server. In other words, not only are
   inputs and outputs compatible, but the serialization and deserialization
   expectations continue to match.
3. Semantic compatibility: Code written against a previous version **must**
   continue to receive what most reasonable developers would expect. (This can
   be tricky in practice, however, and sometimes determining what users will
   expect can involve a judgment call.)

**Note:** In general, the specific guidance here assumes use of protocol
buffers and JSON as transport formats. Other transport formats may have
slightly different rules.

### Adding components

In general, new components (interfaces, methods, messages, fields, enums, or
enum values) **may** be added to existing APIs in the same major version.

However, keep the following guidelines in mind when doing this:

- Code written against the previous surface (and thus is unaware of the new
  components) **must** continue to be treated the same way as before.
  - New required fields **must not** be added to existing request messages or
    resources.
  - Any field being populated by clients **must** have a default behavior
    matching the behavior before the field was introduced.
  - Any field previously populated by the server **must** continue to be
    populated, even if it introduces redundancy.
- For enum values specifically, be aware that it is possible that user code
  does not handle new values gracefully.
  - Enum values **may** be freely added to enums which are only used in request
    messages.
  - Enums that are used in response messages or resources and which are
    expected to receive new values **should** document this. Enum values still
    **may** be added in this situation; however, appropriate caution **should**
    be used.

**Note:** It is possible when adding a component closely related to an existing
component (for example, `string foo_value` when `string foo` already exists) to
enter a situation where generated code will conflict. Service owners **should**
be aware of subtleties in the tooling they or their users are likely to use
(and tool authors **should** endeavor to avoid such subtleties if possible).

### Removing or renaming components

Existing components (interfaces, methods, messages, fields, enums, or enum
values) **must not** be removed from existing APIs in the same major version.
Removing a component is a backwards incompatible change.

**Important:** Renaming a component is semantically equivalent to "remove and
add". In cases where these sorts of changes are desirable, a service **may**
add the new component, but **must not** remove the existing one. In situations
where this can allow users to specify conflicting values for the same semantic
idea, the behavior **must** be clearly specified.

### Moving into oneofs

Existing fields **must not** be moved into or out of a oneof. This a
backwards-incompatible change in the Go protobuf stubs.

### Changing the type of fields

Existing fields and messages **must not** have their type changed, even if the
new type is wire-compatible, because type changes alter generated code in a
breaking way.

### Changing resource names

A resource **must not** change its name.

Unlike most breaking changes, this affects major versions as well: in order for
a client to expect to use v2.0 access a resource that was created in v1.0 or
vice versa, the same resource name **must** be used in both versions.

More subtly, the set of valid resource names **should not** change either, for
the following reasons:

- If resource name formats become more restrictive, a request that would
  previously have succeeded will now fail.
- If resource name formats become less restrictive than previously documented,
  then code making assumptions based on the previous documentation could break.
  Users are very likely to store resource names elsewhere, in ways that may be
  sensitive to the set of permitted characters and the length of the name.
  Alternatively, users might perform their own resource name validation to
  follow the documentation.
  - For example, Amazon gave customers [a lot of warning][ec2] and had a
    migration period when they started allowing longer EC2 resource IDs.

### Semantic changes

Code will often depend on API behavior and semantics, _even when such behavior
is not explicitly supported or documented_. Therefore, APIs **must not** change
visible behavior or semantics in ways that are likely to break reasonable user
code, as such changes will be seen as breaking by those users.

**Note:** This does involve some level of judgment; it is not always clear
whether a proposed change is likely to break users, and an expansive reading of
this guidance could ostensibly prevent _any_ change (which is not the intent).

## Further reading

- For compatibility around pagination, see [AIP-158][].
- For understanding stability levels and expectations, see [AIP-181][].

## Changelog

- **2019-12-16**: Clarified that moving existing fields into oneofs is
  breaking.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-158]: ./0158.md
[aip-181]: ./0181.md
[ec2]: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/theyre-here-longer-ec2-resource-ids-now-available/
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
