---
aip:
  id: 181
  state: approved
  created: 2019-02-18
  updated: 2019-05-09
permalink: /181
redirect_from:
  - /0181
---

# Stability levels

While different organizations (both inside Google and outside) have different
product life cycles, AIPs refer to the _stability_ of an API component using
the following terms:

## Alpha

Components that have _alpha_ stability undergo rapid iteration with a known set
of users who **must** be tolerant of change. The number of users **should** be
a whitelisted, manageable set, such that it is feasible to communicate with all
of them individually.

Breaking changes **must** be both allowed and expected in alpha components, and
users **must** have no expectation of stability.

## Beta

A _beta_ component **must** be considered complete and ready to be declared
stable, subject to public testing. Beta components **should** be exposed to an
unknown and potentially large set of users. In other words, beta components
**should not** be behind a whitelist; instead, they **should** be available to
the public.

Because users of beta components tend to have a lower tolerance of change, beta
components **should** be as stable as possible; however, the beta component
**must** be permitted to change over time. These changes **should** be minimal
but **may** include backwards-incompatible changes to beta components.
Backwards-incompatible changes **must** be made only after a reasonable
deprecation period to provide users with an opportunity to migrate their code.
This deprecation period **must** be defined at the time of being marked beta.

Beta components **should** be time-boxed and promoted to stable if no issues
are found in the specified timeframe, which **should** be specified at the time
of being marked beta. A reasonable time period **may** vary, but a good rule of
thumb is 90 days.

## Stable

Components considered _stable_ **must** be fully-supported over a long time
period. Because users expect such stability from components marked stable,
there **must** be no breaking changes within the version.

**Note:** In certain exceptional cases, such as security concerns or regulatory
requirements, any API component **may** be changed in a breaking manner
regardless of its stability level.

Turn-down of any version containing stable components **must** have a formal
process defined at the time of being marked stable. This process **must**
define a deprecation period for users which provides them with reasonable
advance warning.

**Note:** These stability levels roughly correspond to the product launch
stages (alpha, beta, GA) in Google Cloud, but are not identical. GCP imposes
its own additional expectations and commitments on top of what is outlined
here.
