---
aip:
  id: 181
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-02-18
permalink: /181
redirect_from:
  - /0181
---

# Stability levels

While different organizations (both inside Google and outside) have different
product lifecycles, AIPs refer to the _stability_ of an API using the following
terms:

## Alpha

APIs that have _alpha_ stability undergo rapid iteration with a known set of
users (it is feasible to communicate with all of them), who are tolerant of
change. That tolerance level may vary by API, but there should be a common set
of expectations between the API team and the users.

Breaking changes are both allowed and expected in alpha APIs, and users have no
expectation of stability. Alpha APIs **should** generally be restricted to an
explicitly whitelisted set of users.

## Beta

A _beta_ API is feature complete and believed to be ready to be declared
stable, subject to public testing. Beta involves slower iteration with a
probably unknown set of users, or too many to communicate with directly. These
users have a lower tolerance for change, but they are aware that the API
surface may change over time; this includes backwards-incompatible changes to
beta-only features (after a deprecation period).

Breaking changes are permitted in beta APIs only with a reasonable deprecation
period, to provide users an opportunity to migrate their code. Beta APIs
**should** generally be available to the public, and **should** be time-boxed
and promoted to stable if no issues are found. What constitutes a reasonable
time period will vary by API, but a good rule of thumb is 90 days.

## Stable

APIs that are _stable_ are fully-supported over a long time period. Users
expect there to be **no** breaking changes within the version (barring
emergency measures for exceptional situations, such as security concerns), and
for that version to remain available. Turn-down of a stable version has a
formal process, with an appropriate deprecation period for users, providing
them with plenty of warning.

**Note:** These stability levels roughly correspond to the product lifecycle
phases (alpha, beta, GA) in Google Cloud, but are not identical. GCP imposes
its own additional expectations and committments on top of what is outlined
here.
