---
aip:
  id: 191
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-25
permalink: /191
redirect_from:
  - /0191
---

# File and directory structure

A consistent file and directory structure, while making minimal difference
technically, makes API surface definitions easier for users and reviewers to
read.

## Guidance

**Note:** The following guidance applies to APIs defined in protocol buffers,
such as those used throughout Google. While the spirit of this guidance applies
to APIs defined using other specification languages or formats, some of the
particular recommendations might be irrelevant.

### Single package

APIs defined in protocol buffers **must** define each individual API in a
single package, which **must** end in a version component. For example:

```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package google.cloud.translation.v3;
```

Google APIs **must** reside in a directory that matches the protocol buffer
`package` directive. For example, the package above dictates that the directory
be `google/cloud/translation/v3`.

### File names

It is often useful to divide API definitions into multiple files. File names
**must** use `snake_case`.

APIs **should** have an obvious "entry" file, generally named after the API
itself. An API with a small number of discrete services (Google Cloud Pub/Sub's
`Publisher` and `Subscriber` is a good example) **may** have a separate entry
file per service.

APIs with only one file **should** use a filename corresponding to the name of
the API.

Bear in mind that the file names often become module names in client libraries,
and customers use them in `import` or `use` statements. Therefore, choosing a
descriptive and language keyword-free filename does matter. For example, a file
called `import.proto` may be problematic in Python.

**Note:** The version **must not** be used as a filename, because this creates
bizarre imports in client libraries. Filenames such as `v3.proto` or
`v1beta1.proto` are prohibited.

### File layout

Individual files **should** place higher level and more important definitions
before lower level and less important definitions.

In a proto file, components **should** be in the following order, and each of
these **should** be separated by a blank line:

- Copyright and license notice (if applicable).
- The proto `syntax` statement.
- The proto `package` statement.
- Any `import` statements, in alphabetical order.
- Any file-level `option` statements.
- Any `service` definitions.
  - Methods **should** be grouped by the resource they impact, and standard
    methods **should** precede custom methods.
- Resource `message` definitions. A parent resource **must** be defined before
  its child resources.
- The RPC request and response `message` definitions, in the same order of the
  corresponding methods. Each request message **must** precede its
  corresponding response message (if any).
- Any remaining `message` definitions.
- Any top-level `enum` definitions.

### Packaging annotations

Protocol buffers ships with annotations to declare the package or namespace
(depending on the vocabulary of the target language) of the generated files.
For example, setting `go_package` or `csharp_namespace` will override the
inferred package name.

When defining APIs, the following rules apply:

- Java
  - The `java_package` annotation **must** be set. The correct value is usually
    the proto package with the appropriate TLD prefixed. Example:
    `com.google.example.v1`.
  - The `java_multiple_files` annotation **must** be set to `true`.
  - The `java_outer_classname` annotation **must** be set, and **should** be
    set to the name of the proto filename, in `PascalCase`, with `Proto`
    appended. Example: `LibraryProto`.
- Other languages
  - Package or namespace directives for other languages **must** be set either
    in every file in the proto package, or none of them. If they are set, the
    values **must** be identical in every file.

**Important:** While other languages have sensible defaults, be aware that
_adding_ this annotation (with a value not equivalent to the default)
constitutes a breaking change in that language. When releasing protos, be sure
that omissions are intentional.

## Changelog

- **2019-11-18**: Added guidance on the packaging annotations.
