---
aip:
  id: 192
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-25
permalink: /192
redirect_from:
  - /0192
---

# Documentation

Documentation is one of the most critical aspects of API design. Users of your
API are unable to dig into the implementation to understand the API better;
often, the API surface definition and its corresponding documentation will be
the only things a user has. Therefore, it is important that documentation be as
clear, complete, and unambiguous as possible.

## Guidance

In APIs defined in protocol buffers, public comments **must** be included over
every component (service, method, message, field, enum, and enum value) using
the protocol buffers comment format. This is important even in cases where the
comment is terse and uninteresting, as numerous tools read these comments and
use them.

Services, in particular, **should** have descriptive comments that explain what
the service is and what users are able to do with it.

**Note:** Many readers will not be native English speakers. Comments **should**
avoid jargon, slang, complex metaphors, pop culture references, or anything
else that will not easily translate. Additionally, many readers will have
different backgrounds and viewpoints; if writing examples involving people,
comments **should** use people who are non-controversial and no longer alive.

### Style

Comments **should** be in grammatically correct American English. However, the
first sentence of each comment **should** omit the subject and be in the
third-person present tense:

```proto
// Creates a book under the given publisher.
rpc CreateBook(CreateBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books"
    body: "book"
  };
}
```

### Descriptions

Descriptions of messages and fields **should** be brief but complete. Sometimes
comments are necessarily perfunctory because there is little to be said;
however, before jumping to that conclusion, consider whether some of the
following questions are relevant:

- What is it?
- How do you use it?
- What does it do if it succeeds? What does it do if it fails?
- Is it idempotent?
- What are the units? (Examples: meters, degrees, pixels)
- What are the side effects?
- What are common errors that may break it?
  - What is the expected input format?
  - What range of values does it accept? (Examples: `[0.0, 1.0)`, `[1, 10]`)
    - Is the range inclusive or exclusive?
  - For strings, what is the minimum and maximum length, and what characters
    are allowed?
    - If a value is above the maximum length, do you truncate or send an error?
- Is it always present? (Example: "Container for voting information. Present
  only when voting information is recorded.")
- Does it have a default setting? (Example: "If `page_size` is omitted, the
  default is 50.")

### Formatting

Any formatting in comments **must** be in [CommonMark][]. Headings and tables
**must not** be used, as these cause problems for several tools, and are
unsuitable for client library reference documentation.

Comments **should** use `code font` for property names and for literals (such
as `true`).

Raw HTML **must not** be used.

### Cross-references

Comments **may** "link" to another component (service, method, message, field,
enum, or enum value) by using the fully-qualified name of the element as a
Markdown reference link. For example: `[Book][google.example.v1.Book]`

### Trademarked names

When referring to the proper, trademarked names of companies or products in
comments, acronyms **should not** be used, unless the acronym is such dominant
colloquial use that avoiding it would obscure the reference (example: [IBM][]).

Comments **should** spell and capitalize trademarked names consistent with the
trademark owner's current branding.

### Internal comments

<!-- TODO: This does not work outside of Google.
           We should probably try to get that fixed. -->

Comments **may** be explicitly marked as internal by wrapping internal content
in `(--` and `--)`.

Non-public links, internal implementation notes (such as `TODO` and `FIXME`
directives), and other such material **must** be marked as internal.

**Note:** Comments **should** use only leading comments (not trailing comments
or detached comments). In particular, comments **must not** use both a leading
and trailing comment to describe any component, because this is a common source
of inadvertent omissions of the internal content annotation.

[commonmark]: https://commonmark.org/
[ibm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM

## Changelog

- **2020-02-14**: Added guidance around the use of trademarked names.
- **2019-09-23**: Added guidance about not using both leading and trailing
  comments.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
