---
aip:
  id: 193
  state: approved
  created: 2019-07-26
permalink: /193
redirect_from:
  - /0193
---

# Errors

Error handling is an important part of designing simple and intuitive APIs.
Consistent error handling allows developers to know how to expect to receive
errors, and to reduce boilerplate by having common error-handling logic, rather
than being expected to constantly add verbose error handling everywhere.

## Guidance

Services **must** return an appropriate HTTP error code for any error. In
particular:

- Services **must not** return a `200 OK` with an error payload.
- Services **must** return an HTTP error code between 400 and 499 to indicate
  that an error occurred because of a client issue.
  - APIs **should** come up with some creative use for [status code 418][].
- Services **must** return an HTTP error code between 500 and 599 to indicate
  that an error occurred because of a server issue.
- In all cases, services **must** use the appropriate [status code][] for the
  particular situation.

Error messages **should** help a reasonably technical user _understand_ and
_resolve_ the issue, and **should not** assume that the user is an expert in
your particular API. Additionally, error messages **must not** assume that the
user will know anything about its underlying implementation.

Error messages **should** be brief but actionable. Any extra information
**should** be provided in the `details` field. If even more information is
necessary, you **should** provide a link where a reader can get more
information or ask questions to help resolve the issue.

### Structure

Error payloads **should** follow a common structure:

```typescript
interface Error {
  type: string;
  message: string;
  domain?: string;
  details: { [index: string]: any };
}
```

- The `type` field **must** be a machine-readable string, and **must not**
  change once introduced, to permit users to be able to write code against a
  specific aspect of the error. It **should** match `/^[a-z][a-z0-9-]{3,63}$/`.
- The `message` field **must** be a human-readable string, and **may** change
  freely.
- The `domain` field **should** be provided if the backend has infrastructure
  running in front of it that could itself be the source of errata. This allows
  common infrastructure to distinguish itself from an API backend in error
  reporting.
- The `details` field **may** include any other data useful to the user.

Google defines a set of [standard detail payloads][details] for error details,
which cover most common needs for API errors. Services **should** use these
standard details payloads when feasible.

Structured details with machine-readable identifiers **must** be used if users
will need to write code against a specific aspect of the error. Error message
strings **may** change over time; however, if an error message does not have a
machine-readable identifier _in addition to_ the `code` field, changing the
error message **must** be considered a backwards-incompatible change.

### Localization

Error messages **must** be in English. If a localized error message is also
required, the service **should** include the following structure in the
`details` field, with [BCP-47][] language codes as keys:

```typescript
interface LocalizedError extends Error {
  details: {
    [index: string]: any;
    localizedMessages: { [index: string]: string };
  };
}
```

### Partial errors

APIs **should not** support partial errors. Partial errors add significant
complexity for users, because they usually sidestep the use of error codes, or
move those error codes into the response message, where the user must write
specialized error handling logic to address the problem.

However, occasionally partial errors are necessary, particularly in bulk
operations where it would be hostile to users to fail an entire large request
because of a problem with a single entry.

Methods that require partial errors **should** use [long-running operations][],
and the method **should** put partial failure information in the metadata
message.

## Further reading

- For which error codes to retry, see [AIP-194](https://aip.dev/194).
- For how to retry errors in client libraries, see
  [AIP-4221][].

## Changelog

- **2020-01-22**: Added a reference to the [`ErrorInfo`][] message.
- **2019-10-14**: Added guidance restricting error message mutability to if
  there is a machine-readable identifier present.
- **2019-09-23**: Added guidance about error message strings being able to
  change.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[aip-4221]: ./client-libraries/4221.md
[bcp-47]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag
[details]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto
[`ErrorInfo`]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/rpc/error_details.proto#L111
[grpc status code documentation]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/statuscodes.md
[`google.rpc.Code`]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/rpc/code.proto
[`google.rpc.Status`]: https://github.com/googleapis/api-common-protos/blob/master/google/rpc/status.proto
[long-running operations]: ./0151.md
[status code]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes
[status code 418]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyper_Text_Coffee_Pot_Control_Protocol
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
