---
aip:
  id: 200
  state: approved
  created: 2018-06-28
  updated: 2019-05-04
permalink: /200
redirect_from:
  - /not-precedent
  - /0200
---

# Avoid setting bad API precedents

Many times, APIs are written in ways that do not match new guidance that is
added to these standards after those APIs have already been released.
Additionally, sometimes it can make sense to intentionally violate standards
for particular reasons, such as maintaining consistency with established
systems, meeting stringent performance requirements, or other practical
concerns. Finally, as carefully as everyone reviews APIs before they are
released, sometimes mistakes can slip through.

Since it often is not feasible to fix past mistakes or make the standards serve
every use case, we may be stuck with these exceptions for quite some time.
Further, since new APIs often base their designs (names, types, structures,
etc) on existing APIs, it is possible that a standards violation in one API
could spill over into other APIs, even if original reason for the exception is
not applicable to the other APIs.

As a result of this problem, it is important to "stop the bleeding" of these
standards exceptions into new APIs, and additionally document the reasons for
each exception so that historical wisdom is not lost.

## Guidance

If an API violates the AIP standards for any reason, there **must** be an
internal comment linking to this document using its descriptive link
([aip.dev/not-precedent]()) to ensure others do not copy the violations or cite
the errors as precedent of a "previously approved API".

The comment should also include an explanation of what violates standards and
why it is necessary. For example:

```proto
message DailyMaintenanceWindow {
  // Time within the maintenance window to start the maintenance operations.
  // It must use the format "HH MM", where HH : [00-23] and MM : [00-59] GMT.
  // (-- aip.dev/not-precedent: This was designed for consistency with crontab,
  //     and preceded the AIP standards.
  //     Ordinarily, this type should be `google.type.TimeOfDay`. --)
  string start_time = 2;

  // Output only. Duration of the time window, automatically chosen to be
  // smallest possible in the given scenario.
  // (-- aip.dev/not-precedent: This preceded the AIP standards.
  //     Ordinarily, this type should be `google.protobuf.Duration`. --)
  string duration = 3;
}
```

## Additional Guidance

APIs should only be considered to be precedent-setting if they are in beta or
GA.

## Possible reasons for violating standards

### Local consistency

If your API violates a standard throughout, it would be jarring and frustrating
to users to break the existing pattern only for the sake of adhering to the
global standard.

For example, if all of your resources use `creation_time` (instead of the
standard field `create_time`), a new resource in your API should continue to
follow the pattern.

However, others who might copy your API should be made aware that this is
contra-standard and not something to cite as precedent when launching new APIs.

```proto
// ...
message Book {
  // (-- aip.dev/not-precedent: This field was present before there was a
  //     standard field.
  //     Ordinarily, it should be spelled `create_time`. --)
  google.protobuf.Timestamp creation_time = 1;
}

// ...
message Author {
  // (-- aip.dev/not-precedent: This field was present before there was a
  //     standard field.
  //     Ordinarily, it should be spelled `create_time`. --)
  google.protobuf.Timestamp creation_time = 1;
}
```

### Already GA (Grandfathered)

Standards violations are sometimes overlooked before launching, resulting in
APIs that enter the GA stage and therefore can not easily be modified.
Additionally, a stable API may pre-date a standards requirement. In these
scenarios, we recognize the difficulty in fixing the problem; however, we want
to avoid others' copying the mistake and citing the existing API as a reason
why their design should be approved.

### Adherence to external spec

Occasionally, APIs must violate standards because specific requests are
implementations of an external specification (for example, OAuth), and their
specification may be at odds with our style guide. In this case, it is likely
to be appropriate to follow the external specification.

### Adherence to existing systems

Similar to the example of an external specification above, it may be proper for
an API to violate standards to fit in with an existing system in some way. This
is a fundamentally similar case where it is wise to meet the customer where
they are. A potential example of this might be integration with or similarity
to a partner API.

### Expediency

Sometimes we have users who need an API surface by a very hard deadline or
money walks away. Since we are running a business here, there will be times
when we recognize the API could be better but cannot get it that way and into
users' hands before the deadline. In those cases, there are exceptions granted
to ship APIs that violate standards due to time and business constraints.

### Technical concerns

Sometimes our internal systems have very specific implementation needs (e.g.,
they rely on operation transforms that speak UTF-16, not UTF-8) and adhering to
standards would require extra work that does not add much value to API
consumers. Future systems which are likely to expose an API at some point
should bear this in mind to avoid building underlying infrastructure which
makes it hard to follow standards.

## Changelog

- **2019-05-04**: Changed to a public link ([aip.dev/not-precedent]()), and
  changed references to "the style guide" to use the more generic term
  "standards" (to account for a general shift to AIPs).
