---
aip:
  id: 203
  state: approved
  created: 2018-07-17
  updated: 2019-06-17
permalink: /203
redirect_from:
  - /0203
---

# Field behavior documentation

When defining fields in protocol buffers, it is customary to explain to users
certain aspects of the field's behavior (such as whether it is required or
optional). Additionally, it can be useful for other tools to understand this
behavior (for example, to optimize client library signatures).

## Guidance

APIs **should** use the `google.api.field_behavior` annotation to describe
well-understood field behavior, such as a field's being required, immutable, or
output only:

```proto
// The audio data to be recognized.
RecognitionAudio audio = 2 [(google.api.field_behavior) = REQUIRED];
```

Additionally, APIs **may** use the `OPTIONAL` value to describe none of the
above. However, it is never mandatory to explicitly describe a field as
optional.

**Note:** The vocabulary given in this document is for _descriptive_ purposes
only, and does not itself add any validation. The purpose is to consistently
document this behavior for users.

## Vocabulary

### Required

The use of `REQUIRED` indicates that the field **must** be present (and set to
a non-empty value) on the request or resource.

A field **should** only be described as required if _either_:

- It is a field on a resource that a user provides somewhere as input. In this
  case, the resource is only valid if a truthy value is _stored_.
  - When [creating][aip-133] the resource, a value **must** be provided for the
    field on the create request.
  - When [updating][aip-134] the resource, the user **may** omit the field
    provided that the field is also absent from the field mask, indicating no
    change to the field (otherwise it **must** be provided).
- It is a field on a request message (a message that is an argument to an RPC,
  with a name usually ending in `Request`). In this case, a value **must** be
  provided as part of the request, and failure to do so **must** cause an error
  (usually `INVALID_ARGUMENT`).

Fields **should not** be described as required in order to signify:

- A field which will always be present in a response.
- A field which is conditionally required in some situations.
- A field on any message (including messages that are resources) which is never
  used as user input.

**Note:** In most cases, empty values (such as `false` for booleans, `0` for
integers, or the unspecified value for enums) are indistinguishable from unset
values, and therefore setting a required field to a falsy value yields an
error. A corollary to this is that a required boolean must be set to `true`.

### Output only

The use of `OUTPUT_ONLY` indicates that the field is provided in responses, but
that including the field in a message in a request does nothing (the server
**must** ignore it and **must not** throw an error as a result of the presence
of a value in this field on input). Similarly, services **must** ignore the
presence of output only fields in update field masks.

Additionally, a field **should** only be described as output only if it is a
field in a resource message, or a field of a message farther down the tree.
Notably, fields in response messages (a message which only ever acts as a
return value to an RPC, usually ending in `Response`) **should not** be
described as output only because this is already implied.

Output only fields **may** be set to empty values if appropriate to the API.

Potential use cases for output only fields (this is not an exhaustive list)
are:

- Create or update timestamps.
- Derived or structured information based on original user input.
- Properties of a resource assigned by the service which can not be altered.

### Input only

The use of `INPUT_ONLY` indicates that the field is provided in requests and
that the corresponding field will not be included in output.

Additionally, a field **should** only be described as input only if it is a
field in a resource message or a field of a message included within a resource
message. Notably, fields in request messages (a message which only ever acts as
an argument to an RPC, with a name usually ending in `Request`) **should not**
be described as input only because this is already implied.

Potential use cases for input only fields (this is not an exhaustive list) are:

- The `ttl` field as described in [AIP-214][].

**Warning:** Input only fields are rare and should be considered carefully
before use.

### Immutable.

The use of `IMMUTABLE` indicates that a field may be set once in a request to
create a resource but may not be changed thereafter.

Additionally, a field **should** only be described as immutable if it is a
field on a request message (a message that is an argument to an RPC, usually
ending in `Request`), or a field of a message included within a request
message.

Potential use cases for immutable fields (this is not an exhaustive list) are:

- Names or IDs which are set on creation and then used as a primary key.

### Optional.

The use of `OPTIONAL` indicates that a field is not required, nor covered by
any of the above descriptions.

A field **may** be described as optional if none of the above vocabulary
applies, and it is a field on a request message (a message that is an argument
to an RPC, usually ending in `Request`), or a field on a submessage, but it is
not mandatory to describe optional fields in this way.

If you do choose to explicitly describe a field as optional, ensure that every
optional field on the message has this indicator. Within a single message,
either all optional fields should be indicated, or none of them should be.

[aip-133]: ./0133.md
[aip-134]: ./0134.md
[aip-214]: ./0214.md

## Changelog

- **2019-12-05**: Added guidance on output only fields in field masks.
- **2019-06-18**: Use the machine-readable annotation, not comments.
