---
aip:
  id: 214
  state: approved
  created: 2018-06-19
permalink: /214
redirect_from:
  - /0214
---

# Resource expiration

Customers often want to provide the time that a given resource or attribute of
a resource is no longer useful or should be deleted. Currently we recommend
that customers do this by specifying an exact "expiration time" into a
`google.protobuf.Timestamp expire_time` field; however, this adds additional
strain on the user when they want to specify a relative time offset until
expiration rather than a specific time until expiration.

Furthermore, the world understands the concept of a "time-to-live", often
abbreviated to TTL, but the typical format of this field (an integer, measured
in seconds) results in a sub-par experience when using an auto-generated client
library.

## Guidance

1.  APIs wishing to convey an expiration **must** rely on a
    [`google.protobuf.Timestamp`][timestamp] field called `expire_time`.
2.  APIs wishing to allow a relative expiration time must define a `oneof`
    called `expiration` (or `{something}_expiration`) containing both the
    `expire_time` field and a separate [`google.protobuf.Duration`][duration]
    field called `ttl`, the latter marked as input only.
3.  APIs **must** always return the expiration time in the `expire_time` field
    and leave the `ttl` field blank when retrieving the resource.
4.  APIs that rely on the specific semantics of a "time to live" (e.g., DNS
    which must represent the TTL as an integer) **may** use an `int64 ttl`
    field (and **should** provide an [aip.dev/not-precedent](./0200.md) comment
    in this case).

### Example

```proto
message ExpiringResource {
  // The name of the resource; the format is: ...
  string name = 1;

  oneof expiration {
    // Timestamp in UTC of when this resource is considered expired.
    // This is *always* provided on output, regardless of what was sent
    // on input.
    google.protobuf.Timestamp expire_time = 2;

    // Input only. The TTL for this resource.
    google.protobuf.Duration ttl = 3 [(google.api.field_behavior) = INPUT_ONLY];
  }
}
```

## Alternatives considered

### A new standard field called `ttl`

We considered allowing a standard field called `ttl` as an alternative way of
defining the expiration, however doing so would require that API services
continually update the field, like a clock counting down. This could
potentially cause problems with the read-modify-write lifecycle where a
resource is being processed for some time, and effectively has its life
extended as a result of that processing time.

### Always use `expire_time`

This is the current state of the world with a few exceptions. In this scenario,
we could potentially push the computation of `now + ttl = expire_time` into
client libraries; however, this leads to a somewhat frustrating experience in
the command-line and using REST/JSON. Leaving things as they are is typically
the default, but it seems many customers want the ability to define relative
expiration times as it is quite a bit easier and removes questions of time
zones, stale clocks, and other silly mistakes.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
[duration]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/duration.proto
[timestamp]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/timestamp.proto
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
