---
aip:
  id: 216
  state: approved
  created: 2018-10-01
permalink: /216
redirect_from:
  - /0216
---

# States

Many API resources carry a concept of "state": ordinarily, the resource's place
in its life cycle. For example, a virtual machine may be being provisioned,
available for use, being spun down, or potentially be in one of several other
situations. A job or query may be preparing to run, be actively running, have
completed, and so on.

## Guidance

Resources needing to communicate their state **should** use an enum, which
**should** be called `State` (or, if more specificity is required, end in the
word `State`). This enum **should** be nested within the message it describes
when only used as a field within that message.

**Important:** We use the term `State`, and _not_ `Status` (which is reserved
for the HTTP and gRPC statuses).

### Enum values

Ideally, Google APIs use the same terminology throughout when expressing the
same semantic concepts. There are usually many words available to express a
given state, but our customers often use multiple APIs together, and it is
easier for them when our terms are consistent.

At a high level:

- Resources that are available for use are `ACTIVE` (preferred over terms such
  as "ready" or "available").
- Resources that have completed a (usually terminal) requested action use past
  participles (usually ending in `-ED`), such as `SUCCEEDED` (not
  "successful"), `FAILED` (not "failure"), `DELETED`, `SUSPENDED`, and so on.
- Resources that are currently undergoing a state change use present
  participles (usually ending in `-ING`), such as `RUNNING`, `CREATING`,
  `DELETING`, and so on. In this case, it is expected that the state is
  temporary and will resolve to another state on its own, with no further user
  action.

**Note:** Remember to only add states that are useful to customers. Exposing a
large number of states simply because they exist in your internal system is
unnecessary and adds confusion for customers. Each state must come with a use
case for why it is necessary.

A list of commonly used enum values for states is in the appendix of this
document.

### Output only

The field referencing the `State` enum in a resource **should** behave and be
documented as "Output only", in accordance with [AIP-203](./0203.md).

APIs **should not** allow a `State` enum to be directly updated through an
"update" method, and **should** instead use a custom state transition method.

This is because update methods are generally not expected to have side effects,
and also because updating state directly implies that it is possible to set the
state to any available value, whereas states generally reflect a resource's
progression through a lifecycle.

### State transition methods

State transition methods are a special type of custom method that are
responsible for transitioning a state field from one enum value to another. As
part of the transition, other fields may also change, e.g. an `update_time`
field. The method definition should look like the following:

```proto
// Publishes a book.
// The `state` of the book after publishing will be PUBLISHED.
// `PublishBook` can be called on Books in the state DRAFT; Books in a
// different state (including PUBLISHED) will return an error.
rpc PublishBook(PublishBookRequest) returns (Book) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{name=publishers/*/books/*}:publish"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- The name of the method **should** be a verb followed by the singular form of
  the resource's message name.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `-Request` suffix.
- The response message **should** be the resource itself.
  - If the RPC is [long-running][], the response message **should** be a
    `google.longrunning.Operation` which resolves to the resource itself.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`.
- The HTTP URI **must** use a `:` character followed by the custom verb
  (`:publish` in the above example), and the verb in the URI **must** match the
  verb in the name of the RPC.
  - If word separation is required, `camelCase` **must** be used.
- The `body` clause in the `google.api.http` annotation **must** be `"*"`.
- The request message field receiving the resource name **should** map to the
  URL path.
  - This field **should** be called `name`.
  - The `name` field **should** be the only variable in the URI path. All
    remaining parameters **should** map to URI query parameters.
- If the state transition is not allowed, the service **must** error with
  `FAILED_PRECONDITION` (HTTP 400).

The request message should look like this:

```proto
message PublishBookRequest {
  // The name of the book to publish.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  string name = 1;
}
```

- A resource name field **must** be included. It **should** be called `name`.
- The comment for the field **should** document the resource pattern.
- Other fields **may** be included.

## Additional Guidance

### Default value

The zero value of each state enum **should** adhere to the following
convention:

```proto
enum State {
  // The default value. This value is used if the state is omitted.
  STATE_UNSPECIFIED = 0;

  // Other values...
}
```

Resources **should not** provide an unspecified state to users, and this value
**should not** actually be used.

### Value uniqueness

Multiple top-level enums within the same package **must** not share the same
values. This is because the C++ protoc code generator flattens top-level enum
values into a single namespace.

State enums **should** live inside the resource definition.

### Breaking changes

**TL;DR:** Clearly communicate to users that state enums may receive new values
in the future, and be conscientious about adding states to an existing enum.

Even though adding states to an existing states enum _can_ break existing user
code, adding states is not considered a breaking change. Consider a state with
only two values: `ACTIVE` and `DELETED`. A user may add code that checks
`if state == ACTIVE`, and in the else cases simply assumes the resource is
deleted. If the API later adds a new state for another purpose, that code will
break.

We ultimately can not control this behavior, but API documentation **should**
actively encourage users to code against state enums with the expectation that
they may receive new values in the future.

APIs **may** add new states to an existing State enum when appropriate, and
adding a new state is _not_ considered a breaking change.

### When to avoid states

Sometimes, a `State` enum may not be what is best for your API, particularly in
situations where a state has a very small number of potential values, or when
states are not mutually exclusive.

Consider the example of a state with only `ACTIVE` and `DELETED`, as discussed
above. In this situation, the API may be better off exposing a
`google.protobuf.Timestamp delete_time`, and instructing users to rely on
whether it is set to determine deletion.

## Appendix: Common states

The following is a list of states in common use. APIs **should** consider prior
art when determining state names, and **should** value local consistency above
global consistency in the case of conflicting precedent.

### Resting states

"Resting states" are lifecycle states that, absent user action, are expected to
remain indefinitely. However, the user can initiate an action to move a
resource in a resting state into certain other states (resting or active).

- `ACCEPTED`
- `ACTIVE`
- `CANCELLED`
- `DELETED`
- `FAILED`
- `SUCCEEDED`
- `SUSPENDED`
- `VERIFIED`

### Active states

"Active states" are lifecycle states that typically resolve on their own into a
single expected resting state.

**Note:** Remember only to expose states that are useful to customers. Active
states are valuable only if the resource will be in that state for a sufficient
period of time. If state changes are immediate, active states are not
necessary.

- `CREATING` (usually becomes `ACTIVE`)
- `DELETING` (usually becomes `DELETED`)
- `PENDING` (usually becomes `RUNNING`)
- `REPAIRING` (usually becomes `ACTIVE`)
- `RUNNING` (usually becomes `SUCCEEDED`)
- `SUSPENDING` (usually becomes `SUSPENDED`)

## Further reading

- For information on enums generally, see [AIP-126][].

## Changelog

- **2019-12-05**: Changed guidance on state transition methods, downgrading
  **must** to **should** on the response type.
- **2019-08-16**: Added guidance for state transition methods.
- **2019-07-18**: Added explicit guidance on the unspecified value.

[aip-126]: ./0126.md
[long-running]: ./0151.md
