---
aip:
  id: 217
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-08-26
permalink: /217
redirect_from:
  - /0217
---

# Unreachable resources

Occasionally, a user may ask for a list of resources, and some set of resources
in the list are temporarily unavailable. For example, a user may ask to list
resources across multiple locations, but one of those locations is temporarily
down. In this situation, it is still desirable to give the user as much as
possible, while indicating that something is missing.

## Guidance

If a method to retrieve data is capable of partially failing due to one or more
resources being temporarily unreachable, the response message **must** include
a field to indicate this:

```proto
// The request message for ListBooks.
message ListBooksRequest {
  // The publisher to list books from.
  // To list books across all publishers, use "publishers/-".
  string parent = 1;

// Other fields (as defined in AIP-132)...
}

message ListBooksResponse {
  // The books matching the request.
  repeated Book books = 1;

  // The next page token, if there are more books matching the
  // request.
  string next_page_token = 2;

  // Unreachable resources.
  repeated string unreachable = 3;
}
```

- The field **must** be a repeated string, and **should** be named
  `unreachable`.
- The field **must** be set to the names of the resources which are the cause
  of the issue, such as the locations or resources that could not be reached.
  The objects listed as unreachable **may** be _parents_ (or higher ancestors)
  rather than the individual resources being requested. For example, if a
  location is down, the location is listed.
  - The response **must not** provide any other information about the issue,
    such as error details or codes. To discover what the underlying issue is,
    users **should** send a more specific request.
  - The service **must** provide a way for the user to get an error with
    additional information, and **should** allow the user to repeat the
    original call with more restrictive parameters in order to do so.
  - The resource names provided in this field **may** be heterogeneous. The
    field **should** document what potential resources may be provided in this
    field, and note that it might expand later.

**Important:** If a single unreachable location or resource prevents returning
any data by definition (for example, a list request for a single publisher
where that publisher's API is down), the service **must** fail the entire
request with an error.

### Pagination

When paginating over a list, it is likely that the service will not know that
there are unreachable locations or resources initially.

- The response **must** provide any outstanding unreachable locations or
  resources in the `unreachable` field on pages _following_ the final page that
  contains a resource.
  - The response **should not** include both requested data and unreachable
    resources on the same page.
    - For example, if there are two pages of books and one unavailable
      publisher, there should be three pages total: first the two pages of
      books, and then a final page with no books and the unavailable publisher.
  - If the number of unreachable resources to list is very large, the response
    **should** honor the `page_size` field in the same way as for resources. In
    this case, all pages with requested information **should** precede all
    pages with unavailable resources or locations.
  - If a location or resource was unreachable during pagination, but the
    service tried again and it became reachable and the data was provided to
    the user on a later page, the final page's `unreachable` field **must not**
    include the intermittently-unreachable location or resource.

## Further reading

- For listing across collections, see [AIP-159][].

[aip-159]: ./0159.md
