---
aip:
  id: 231
  state: approved
  created: 2019-06-18
permalink: /231
redirect_from:
  - /0231
---

# Batch methods: Get

Some APIs need to allow users to get a specific set of resources at a
consistent time point (e.g. using a read transaction). A batch get method
provides this functionality.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support Batch Get using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc BatchGetBooks(BatchGetBooksRequest) returns (BatchGetBooksResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    get: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:batchGet"
  };
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with `BatchGet`. The remainder of the RPC name
  **should** be the plural form of the resource being retrieved.
- The request and response messages **must** match the RPC name, with
  `-Request` and `-Response` suffixes.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `GET`.
- The HTTP URI **must** end with `:batchGet`.
- The URL path **should** represent the collection for the resource, matching
  the collection used for simple CRUD operations. If the operation spans
  parents, a dash (`-`) **may** be accepted as a wildcard.
- There **must not** be a body key in the `google.api.http` annotation.
- The operation **must** be atomic: it **must** fail for all resources or
  succeed for all resources (no partial success). For situations requiring
  partial failures, `List` ([AIP-132][]) methods **should** be used.
  - If the operation covers multiple locations and at least one location is
    down, the operation **must** fail.

### Request message

The request for a batch get method **should** be specified with the following
pattern:

```proto
message BatchGetBooksRequest {
  // The parent resource shared by all books being retrieved.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  // If this is set, the parent of all of the books specified in `names`
  // must match this field.
  string parent = 1;
  // The names of the books to retrieve.
  // A maximum of 1000 books can be retrieved in a batch.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}/books/{book}
  repeated string names = 2;
}
```

- A `parent` field **should** be included to facilitate inclusion in the URI as
  well to permit a single permissions check. If a caller sets this field, and
  the parent collection in the name of any resource being retrieved does not
  match, the request **must** fail.
  - This field **should** be required if only 1 parent per request is allowed.
- The request message **must** include a repeated field which accepts the
  resource names specifying the resources to retrieve. The field **should** be
  named `names`.
- Other fields besides `name` **may** be "hoisted" from the [standard Get
  request][request-message]. There is no way to allow for these fields to
  accept different values for different resources; if this is needed, use the
  [alternative request message form](#nested-request-objects).
- Batch get **should not** support pagination because transactionality across
  API calls would be extremely difficult to implement or enforce, and the
  request defines the exact scope of the response anyway.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.
- The comment above the `names` field **should** document the maximum number of
  requests allowed.

### Response message

The response for a batch get method **should** be specified with the following
pattern:

```proto
message BatchGetBooksResponse {
  // Books requested.
  repeated Book books = 1;
}
```

- The response message **must** include one repeated field corresponding to the
  resources being retrieved.
- The order of books in the response **must** be the same as the names in the
  request.

[request-message]: ./0131.md#request-message

### Nested request objects

If the [standard Get request message][request-message] contains a field besides
the resource name that needs to be different between different resources being
requested, the batch message **may** alternatively hold a `repeated` field of
the [standard Get request message][request-message]. This is generally
discouraged unless your use case really requires it.

The request for a batch get method using this approach **should** be specified
with the following pattern:

```proto
message BatchGetBooksRequest {
  // The parent resource shared by all books being retrieved.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  // If this is set, the parent field in the GetBookRequest messages
  // must either be empty or match this field.
  string parent = 1;

  // The requests specifying the books to retrieve.
  // A maximum of 1000 books can be retrieved in a batch.
  repeated GetBookRequest requests = 2;
}
```

- A `parent` field **should** be included. If a caller sets this field, and the
  parent collection in the name of any resource being retrieved does not match,
  the request **must** fail.
  - This field **should** be required if only 1 parent per request is allowed.
- The request message **must** include a repeated field which accepts the
  request messages specifying the resources to retrieve, as specified for
  [standard Get methods][request-message]. The field **should** be named
  `requests`.
- Other fields **may** be "hoisted" from the [standard Get
  request][request-message], which means that the field can be set at either
  the batch level or child request level. Similar to `parent`, if both the
  batch level and child request level are set for the same field, the values
  **must** match.
- Batch get **should not** support pagination because transactionality across
  API calls would be extremely difficult to implement or enforce, and the
  request defines the exact scope of the response anyway.
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.
- The comment above the `requests` field **should** document the maximum number
  of requests allowed.

[aip-132]: https://aip.dev/132

## Changelog

- **2019-09-11**: Changed the primary recommendation to specify a repeated
  string instead of a repeated standard Get request message. Moved the original
  recommendation into its own section.
- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
