---
aip:
  id: 233
  state: approved
  created: 2019-06-18
permalink: /233
redirect_from:
  - /0233
---

# Batch methods: Create

Some APIs need to allow users to create multiple resources in a single
transaction. A batch create method provides this functionality.

## Guidance

APIs **may** support Batch Create using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc BatchCreateBooks(BatchCreateBooksRequest) returns (BatchCreateBooksResponse) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=publishers/*}/books:batchCreate"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with `BatchCreate`. The remainder of the RPC
  name **should** be the plural form of the resource being created.
- The request and response messages **must** match the RPC name, with
  `-Request` and `-Response` suffixes.
  - However, in the event that the request may take a significant amount of
    time, the response message **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation`
    which ultimately resolves to the `-Response` type.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST`.
- The HTTP URI **must** end with `:batchCreate`.
- The URL path **should** represent the collection for the resource, matching
  the collection used for simple CRUD operations. If the operation spans
  parents, a dash (`-`) **may** be accepted as a wildcard.
- The body clause in the `google.api.http` annotation **should** be `"*"`.
- The operation **must** be atomic: it **must** fail for all resources or
  succeed for all resources (no partial success).
  - If the operation covers multiple locations and at least one location is
    down, the operation **must** fail.

### Request message

The request for a batch create method **should** be specified with the
following pattern:

```proto
message BatchCreateBooksRequest {
  // The parent resource shared by all books being created.
  // Format: publishers/{publisher}
  // If this is set, the parent field in the CreateBookRequest messages
  // must either be empty or match this field.
  string parent = 1;

  // The request message specifying the resources to create.
  // A maximum of 1000 books can be created in a batch.
  repeated CreateBookRequest requests = 2;
}
```

- A `parent` field **should** be included. If a caller sets this field, and the
  `parent` field of any child request message does not match, the request
  **must** fail. The `parent` field of child request messages can be omitted if
  the `parent` field in this request is set.
  - This field **should** be required if only 1 parent per request is allowed.
- The request message **must** include a repeated field which accepts the
  request messages specifying the resources to create, as specified for
  [standard Create methods][request-message]. The field **should** be named
  `requests`.
- Other fields **may** be "hoisted" from the [standard Create
  request][request-message], which means that the field can be set at either
  the batch level or child request level. Similar to `parent`, if both the
  batch level and child request level are set for the same field, the values
  **must** match.
  - Fields which must be unique cannot be hoisted (e.g. Customer-provided id
    fields).
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this
  or another AIP.
- The comment above the `requests` field **should** document the maximum number
  of requests allowed.

### Response message

The response for a batch create method **should** be specified with the
following pattern:

```proto
message BatchCreateBooksResponse {
  // Books created.
  repeated Book books = 1;
}
```

- The response message **must** include one repeated field corresponding to the
  resources that were created.

[request-message]: ./0133.md#request-message

## Changelog

- **2019-08-01**: Changed the examples from "shelves" to "publishers", to
  present a better example of resource ownership.
