---
aip:
  id: 235
  state: reviewing
  created: 2019-06-18
permalink: /235
redirect_from:
  - /0235
---

# Batch Delete

Some APIs need to allow users to delete a set of resources in a single
transaction. A batch delete method provides this functionality.

## Guidance

Batch delete methods are specified using the following pattern:

```proto
rpc BatchDeleteBooks(BatchDeleteBooksRequest) returns (google.protobuf.Empty) {
  option (google.api.http) = {
    post: "/v1/{parent=shelves/*}/books:batchDelete"
    body: "*"
  };
}
```

- The RPC's name **must** begin with `BatchDelete`. The remainder of the RPC name
  **should** be the plural form of the resource being deleted.
- The request message **must** match the RPC name, with a `-Request` suffix.
- The response message **should** be `google.protobuf.Empty`.
  - If the resource is [soft deleted](#soft-delete), the response message
    **should** be a response message containing the updated resources.
  - In the event that the request may take a significant amount of time, the
    response message **must** be a `google.longrunning.Operation` which resolves to
    the correct response.
- The HTTP verb **must** be `POST` (not `DELETE`).
- The HTTP URI **must** end with `:batchDelete`.
- The URL path **should** represent the collection for the resource, matching
  the collection used for simple CRUD operations. If the operation spans
  parents, a dash (`-`) **may** be accepted as a wildcard.
- The body clause in the `google.api.http` annotation **should** be `"*"`.
- The operation **should** be atomic: it **should** fail for all resources or succeed
  for all resources (no partial success).

### Request message

The request for a batch delete method **should** be specified with the following
pattern:

```proto
message BatchDeleteBooksRequest {
  // The parent resource shared by all books being deleted.
  // Format: shelves/{shelf}
  // If this is set, the parent field in the DeleteBookRequest messages
  // must either be empty or match this field.
  string parent = 1;

  // The resource names of the books to delete.
  // A maximum of 1000 books can be deleted in a batch.
  repeated DeleteBookRequest requests = 2;
}
```

- A `parent` field **should** be included. If a caller sets this field,
  and the `parent` field of any child request message does not match, the
  request **must** fail. The `parent` field of child request messages can be
  omitted if the `parent` field in this request is set.
  - This field **should** be required if only 1 parent per request is allowed.
- The request message **must** include a repeated field which accepts the
  request messages specifying the resources to delete, as specified for
  [standard Delete methods][request-message]. The field **should** be named
  `requests`.
- Other fields **may** be "hoisted" from the
  [standard Update request][request-message], which means that the field can be
  set at either the batch level or child request level. Similar to `parent`,
  if both the batch level and child request level are set for the same field,
  the values **must** match.
  - Fields which must be unique cannot be hoisted (e.g. `etag`).
- The request message **must not** contain any other required fields, and
  **should not** contain other optional fields except those described in this or
  another AIP.
- The comment above the names field **should** document the maximum number of
  requests allowed.
- Filter-based matching **must not** be supported.

### Filter-based matching disallowed

- Filter-based matching **must not** be supported, because it makes it too easy for
  users to accidentally delete important data.

### Response message (soft-delete only)

In the case where a response message is necessary because the resource is
soft-deleted, the response **should** be specified with the following pattern:

```proto
message BatchDeleteBooksResponse {
  // Books deleted.
  repeated Book books = 1;
}
```

- The response message **must** include one repeated field corresponding to the
  resources that were soft-deleted.

[request-message]: ./0135.md#request-message
