---
newsletter:
  year: 2020
  month: April
  description: |
    This month's AIPs revolve around handling lists and series of data, which
    present specific challenges in APIs.
  aips:
    reviewing: [124, 144, 160]
permalink: /news/2020-04
---

# Data Series

Welcome to the second edition of the **AIP newsletter**, which is designed to
keep you up to date about the AIP program, and particular proposals making
their way through the system.

This month's new AIPs (unintentionally) share a common theme: handling lists
and series of data, whether in fields, resource relationships, or actual list
methods. These new AIPs are long overdue: they codify knowledge that has long
been reasonably consistent, but tribal.

The AIP newsletter kicks off what is effectively a "public comment" period: the
AIP editors are happy with these proposals, but we want to ensure that you are
too. Assuming feedback is sufficiently positive, we intend to formally approve
these proposals on Friday, April 24, 2020.

## AIPs under review

### AIP-124: Resource associations

> APIs sometimes have resource hierarchies that can not be cleanly expressed in
> the usual tree structure.

[Resource association][aip-124] comes into play when a resource needs something
other than a direct parent-child relationship. This might mean a many-to-many
relationship, or it might be a one-to-many association that is distinct from
the parent-child relationship.

We have had several APIs struggle with unusual associations over the past year
or so. In general, this has been handled reasonably consistently, but we never
codified the guidance into an official AIP.

**Summary:** [AIP-124][] provides patterns for the two most common
associations: a resource with multiple different one-to-many relationships, and
a resource with a many-to-many association with another resource.

We are aiming to approve AIP-124 on April 24. If you have feedback, please
[leave a comment](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/475).

[aip-124]: ../aip/0124.md

### AIP-144: Repeated fields

> Representing lists of data in an API is trickier than it often appears. Users
> often need to modify lists in place, and longer data series within a single
> resource pose a challenge for pagination.

[Repeated fields][aip-144] are somewhat common in APIs, and a common question
that we get is how to handle adding or removing a single item from them
atomically. Additionally, repeated fields can become a trap if they are
unbounded in size and become too large.

This is codification of guidance that we have been giving on a case-by-case
basis for some time. In particular, this documents the various restrictions on
the two update strategies.

**Summary:** [AIP-144][] lays out guidance for repeated fields, and details two
distinct strategies for updating repeated fields.

We are aiming to approve AIP-144 on April 24. If you have feedback, please
[leave a comment](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/476).

[aip-144]: ../aip/0144.md

### AIP-160: Filtering

> Often, when listing resources, it is desirable to filter over the collection
> and only return results that the user is interested in.

[Filtering][aip-160] involves taking a list of resources (usually) and only
providing the results that the user wants, specified using a familiar syntax
similar to that of Google search.

This is likely the most-requested AIP of all time. We have had internal
filtering documents for ages, but we have not had a public version, and one has
been sorely needed for years. Also, this work would likely still be unfinished
if not for the efforts of [Tristan Swadell][]; we are grateful for his efforts.

**Summary:** [AIP-160][] offers a detailed breakdown of the filtering syntax
and how to provide filtering results in list and search methods.

We are aiming to approve AIP-160 on April 24. If you have feedback, please
[leave a comment](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/473).

[aip-160]: ../aip/0160.md
[tristan swadell]: https://github.com/tristonianjones

## Recent updates

In addition to the new AIPs under review, we have added the following guidance
to existing AIPs:

- [AIP-133](../aip/0133.md): Clarify which fields can be required
  ([#460](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/460))
- [AIP-140](../aip/0140.md): Add guidance about message and field name
  conflicts ([#470](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/470))
- [AIP-151](../aip/0151.md): Clarify that both `response_type` and
  `metadata_type` are expected
  ([#469](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/469))
- [AIP-231](../aip/0231.md): Clarify Batch Get behavior if no resource names
  are sent ([#474](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/474))
