---
newsletter:
  year: 2020
  month: June
  description: Patterns around ranges and generic fields.
  aips:
    reviewing: [145, 146]
permalink: /news/2020-06
---

# Field patterns

Welcome to the fourth edition of the **AIP newsletter**, which is designed to
keep you up to date about the AIP program, and particular proposals making
their way through the system.

This month, we have two new AIPs, both around patterns for specific kinds of
fields.

As always, the AIP newsletter kicks off what is effectively a "public comment"
period: the AIP editors are happy with these proposals, but we want to ensure
that you are too. Assuming feedback is sufficiently positive, we intend to
formally approve these proposals on Friday, June 26, 2020.

## AIPs under review

### AIP-145: Ranges

> Services often need to represent ranges of discrete or continuous values.
> These have wide differences in meaning, and come in many types: integers,
> floats, and timestamps, just to name a few, and the expected meaning of a
> range can vary in subtle ways depending on the type of range being discussed.

[Ranges][aip-145] are fields that represent a range of discrete or continuous
values. These are often integers or floats, but can be other values where
ranges make sense, such as dates.

The primary challenge for ranges is whether their values (particularly their
end values) should be inclusive or exclusive. Most developers are used to
exclusive end values, but with some notable and precise exceptions (example:
dates are an exception, but not timestamps), and the AIP attempts to encode
this using the idea of "colloquial precedent".

**Summary:** [AIP-145][] provides patterns for ranges of values: two fields
that represent a start and end value.

We are aiming to approve AIP-145 on June 26. If you have feedback, please
[leave a comment](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/523).

[aip-145]: ../aip/0145.md

### AIP-146: Generic fields

> Occasionally it is appropriate to have a generic or polymorphic field of some
> kind that can conform to multiple schemata, or even be entirely free-form.

[Generic fields][aip-146] discusses the various ways to approach a polymorphic
or entirely generic field in the API. These provide implementation flexibility,
but the tradeoff is a less clear API contract. There are several ways to
provide a generic field, and the AIP enumerates them and discussed the
tradeoffs.

**Summary:** [AIP-146][] offers four patterns for generic fields, and describes
the tradeoffs of each.

We are aiming to approve AIP-146 on June 26. If you have feedback, please
[leave a comment](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/524).

[aip-146]: ../aip/0146.md

## Recent updates

In addition to the new AIPs under review, we have added the following guidance
to existing AIPs:

- [AIP-122](../aip/0122.md): Corrected a mistaken piece of guidance about
  capitalization ([#513](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/513))
- [AIP-132](../aip/0132.md): Removed mandate to document default ordering
  ([#512](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/512))
- [AIP-140](../aip/0140.md): Add guidance for URI fields
  ([#519](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/519))
- [AIP-143](../aip/0143.md): Change guidance for countries to `region_code`
  ([#507](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/507))
- [AIP-203](../aip/0203.md): Clarified behavior for updating immutable fields
  ([#516](https://github.com/googleapis/aip/pull/516))
