---
id: 2715
state: reviewing
created: 2018-09-10
---

# Documenting authorization changes

Authorization is critical to manage well. Understanding an API includes
understanding not only what operations do, but when one is allowed to do them.
Authorization changes, either new authorization constructs or new uses of
existing authorization constructs, should be easy to find in a design rather
than scattered through the document in individual sections.

In order to make it easy to see what (if any) authorization constructs are
being modified in your design, we want to be able to find them in a single,
clear place.

**Note:** This is _not_ talking about RPC-level permissions, like those covered
by `RpcSecurityPolicy`, but about authorization constructs used by your API for
its own purposes.

## Definitions

There are a couple of common types of authorization construct:

A **role** refers to an authorization construct which is granted to an
_identity_ or an _identity group_ on a _resource_. The most well known examples
of roles in G Suite are the `commenter`, `reader`, `writer`, and `owner` roles
from Drive.

A **permission** refers to an authorization construct which is used to check
whether a particular _identity_ can execute some _operation_. For example, to
check whether the current user can delete a file, the application may check
whether the user has the `file.delete` permission on the file. Permissions are
most often assigned to roles, so that only roles are granted to identities or
identity groups, but some systems allow permissions to be granted directly.
Applications often only use each permission to authorize a single operation on
a resource, but there are cases where an application may use a permission to
authorize multiple different operations.

Within an application, authorization checks are made using only one of these
authorization constructs (typically permissions, if the application has that
concept). For example, in order to determine if a user can read a document, an
application would _either_ check whether the user has a `doc.read` permission
_or_ has the `reader` role, but not both.

## Guidance

If your design creates new authorization constructs or extends/modifies the use
of any existing authorization constructs, you **must** have a separate section
in your design document that describes this. You **may** additionally discuss
these in any other place in your document.

It is not important whether this is a top-level section or subsection. It is
important that all such changes are listed together in a distinct section so
they are easy to find and analyze.

If the identifier of an authorization construct that is new or modified is
visible to users or developers, the way that it is identified should also be in
your document. Examples of this are:

- If access is granted using roles and a new role is being added, the way that
  the role is identified in the role granting RPCs should be in your document.
- If there is an API that allows permissions assigned to roles to be
  manipulated, the way that the permission is identified in the role
  manipulation RPCs should be in your document.
