---
id: 2716
state: approved
created: 2018-09-10
---

# Standard terms in names

APIs have a lot of identifier names (fields, constants, methods, ...), that
often contain terms for things, such as `url` (`getUrl()`, `doc_url`, ...) or
`id` (`lookupId()`, `student_id`).

It is useful to have a standard set of terms for common concepts in these
various names. This makes it easier for developers to understand new APIs based
on previous experience. It is not (for example) that `id` is a better term than
`uid` or other options, but it also is not worse, and having different choices
in different APIs is confusing and unnecessary.

This AIP defines terms to use for such common concepts. These terms should be
used for the same concept in identifier names.

This is supplemental to the API design guide, which lists [standard field
names][] and has other rules about identifiers.

[standard field names]: https://cloud.google.com/apis/design/standard_fields

## Guidance

Absent other, more specific guidance, APIs **should** use the following
standard terms (as opposed to alternatives) as parts of identifier names to
refer to common concepts, and **must not** use them to refer to other things:

- `uri` for URIs/URLs (as opposed to `url`, `link`, `href`, etc.)
- `id` for a unique identifier, either globally unique or within a specified
  context
- `index` to indicate an ordinal number of an item within a collection, such as
  `message_index` on a message to say what place it occupies in a stream of
  message (unless there is a more specific name to use, such as if the number
  also is used as an ID, use `id`).

APIs **should** avoid use of the term `resource` in fields that have resource
names, as this is redundant.

Any more specific guidance overrides these rules. For example, the [AIP-122][]
rule to use `name` for the resource name overrides using the term `id` for
unique identifiers.

[aip-122]: ../0122.md

## Fallback to schema.org

If you are looking for standard terms for things, [schema.org][] is a good
place to look for terms that have been fairly widely vetted as being normal,
customary, and/or clear. You **should** consult it when choosing identifier
names when other strategies fail.

[schema.org]: https://schema.org/
