---
id: 2717
state: reviewing
created: 2018-09-10
---

# Patterns for generic fields

Developers have several options for how to represent generic values in proto
messages. There are reasons to choose one over the other. Understanding them
will lead to better and more consistent APIs.

## Guidance

APIs **should** follow a consistent application of `oneof` vs.
`map<string, Foo>` vs. `Any` vs. `Struct`.

### `oneof`

A `oneof` is used to create a restriction on a set of optional fields,
enforcing that only one of them may be set (these fields are still separate
individual fields). A common pattern is to have a message that contains a
single `oneof` collection of various message types. Such a `oneof` message is
conceptually similar to a C `union`, or C++ `std::variant`. These **should** be
used in most places where a generic message type is needed, in preference to
other approaches.

**Note:** Adding additional possible values to an existing `oneof` is a
non-breaking change, but moving existing fields into or out of a `oneof` is
breaking (it creates a backwards-incompatible change in Go protobuf stubs).

### `map<string, Foo>`

If a more generic structure is needed, a map of strings to objects **may** be
used. Such a map is represented by a normal JSON object, such as
`{"a": "foo", "b": "bar"}`. The downside to such maps is that they are limited
to flat structures, and they can be difficult to work with because many string
constants may be needed.

### `Any`

An [`Any`][any] allows any message to be packed into the field. This is
conceptually similar to a "bytes" field containing a serialized message. The
advantage of an `Any` is that a user-defined proto message can be stored along
with type information. The user must be able to know which kind of object is in
the `Any`, which complicates the design. The disadvantage is that working with
and debugging any protos is much more complicated since the code may or may not
know how to deserialize the packed message. Also, the developer must contend
with unexpected types of messages in the `Any`.

`Any` **should not** be used as a request parameter. Request parameters will
either be a fixed set of types, in which case a `oneof` **should** be used, or
a type descriptor would need to be sent along, in which case a struct
**should** be used, which achieves essentially the same thing with much simpler
semantics.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
[any]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/any.proto

### `Struct`

The [`Struct`][struct] message can be used to represent arbitrary nested JSON.
For example, given the following code:

```java
Struct.Builder builder = Struct.newBuilder();
Value town = Value.newBuilder().setStringValue("Springfield").build();
Value population = Value.newBuilder().setNumberValue(273).build();
builder.putFields("town", town);
builder.putFields("population", population);
Struct survey = builder.build();
```

`survey` would serialize as the actual JSON
`{"town": "Springfield": "population": 273}`. This message type is fairly
uncommon, and **should** only be used rarely.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
[struct]: https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/struct.proto
