---
id: 2718
state: draft
created: 2018-11-08
---

# References to objects in other APIs

Your API may need to refer to objects in other APIs. For example, a Sheets cell
may want to refer to the Slides deck that explains its meaning. This kind of
cross reference should be as natural to use as possible with the target API.

## Guidance

When your API refers to an object accessed via another API (the "target" API),
the reference your API provides depends upon whether the reference is compliant
with One Platform or not.

- If a field always holds a compliant reference to a single specific target
  API, the reference you provide **must** be a relative URI from the top level
  of the target API's naming hierarchy. For example, if the full URL of the
  object is `https://koalas.googleapis.com/koalas/123435` the reference you
  return to it **must** be the relative URI `koalas/123435`. Further, your
  documentation must make clear that the reference is used with
  `koalas.googleapis.com`.

  This provides the developer with a natural way to use the reference, using
  the returned path directly. It also ensures that they know which API
  understands that reference.

- If a field always holds a compliant reference, but is not limited to a single
  target API, the reference you provide **must** be a relative URI that
  includes the path of its specific target API, such as
  `koalas.googleapis.com/koalas/123435`. This provides the developer with the
  correct target in a formalized, usable way.

- Otherwise, the reference you return **must** be chosen to be as natural to
  use as possible with the target API, and the API and its version must be
  documented. For example, if the Apiary-based Koala API uses an ID in its
  `GetKoalaData` method, you **must** return the ID that can be used as a
  parameter, as well as documenting that you are using IDs that work in Koala
  API 1.0.

### Naming

For compliant references, you **should** avoid the use of the terms "reference"
and "name" in the field name. That is, `koala` is preferred to
`koala_reference` or `koala_name`
([see AIP-122](../0122.md#fields-representing-another-resource)).

For other target APIs, you **should** echo that API's terminology in the name
for clarity. For example, if the target API's `GetKoalaDataRequest` has a
`koala_num` field, your field name **should** probably be `koala_num`, or it
would include `koala_num` in its name, such as `responsible_koala_num`.
