---
aip:
  id: 3260
  scope: firebase
  state: draft
  created: 2020-06-10
  updated: 2019-06-10
permalink: /firebase/3260
redirect_from:
  - /3260
---

# Firebase CLI

## Guidance

### Command Naming

Commands **must** be named in lowercase using colons to separate namespaces.
The final segment of a command **should** be an action verb, for example
`list`, `deploy`, or `clone`. A "get" of a single resource **may** omit the
action for the sake of brevity (e.g. `apps:sdkconfig` instead of
`apps:sdkconfig:get`).

### Project Selection

The Firebase CLI works with "project directories" that can be associated with
one or more Firebase projects via the `use` command. This ambient project
selection can be overridden by passing the `-P` or `--project` flag.

All Firebase CLI commands **must** determine the intended project for a command
based on common project selection, except when a command involves multiple
projects (e.g. a command that clones configuration from one project to
another).

### JSON Output

All Firebase CLI commands support machine-readable output via the `--json`
flag. If a command correlates to a single API call, the unmodified response of
that API call should be provided as the JSON response (with wrapped CLI
metadata).

If a command does not directly correlate to an API call, the output **should**
include all information a user might reasonably need for programmatic
interpretation of the command. Output **must** be formatted in sanke-case and
generally conform to all standard Google API guidance (e.g. [field
names][aip-140]).

### Arguments and Flags

Required inputs for a command **must** be represented as arguments (e.g.
`database:get /path`) unless doing so would be confusing to the user. For
instance, `appdistribution:distribute` requires as input both a file to
distribute and an App ID, so `--app <appId>` as a required flag is more clear
than two unrelated arguments with no clear hierarchy.

Flags **must** be named using kebab case (e.g. `--example-flag`) and **may**
provide a single-letter alias that does not conflict with [defined global
flags][global-flags].

#### Common Flags

`--app <appId>` - used to refer to a specific app within a Firebase project.

`--force` - used to indicate that a command should proceed without additional
prompting regarding potentially destructive actions. For example, deploying
Cloud Functions with `--force` will automatically delete functions, while
without the user is prompted.

`-o, --output <path>` - this flag **may** be used to allow convenient output of
a serialized response to a local file. If the output is JSON, it **must**
output equivalent JSON to `--json` without wrapped CLI metadata. If the command
fetches a deployable resource, it **must** fetch it in a deploy-compatible
format. The string path **may** be optional if a clear default path exists. If
a file already exists at the path, a confirmation prompt **must** be displayed
unless a `--force` flag is also provided.

### Common Command Types

#### List Commands

Commands that return a list of like resources **must** use a `:list` suffix
(e.g. `projects:list`).

List commands **must not** require manual pagination (e.g. a `--page-token`
flag) and will usually recursively paginate all results by default. List
commands **may** include a `--limit <int>` flag when a natural ordering exists,
such as a reverse chronological list of releases. A `--limit 0` flag indicates
that all results should be fetched and returned.

The JSON output of a list command **must** be a concatenated array of all
fetched resources in their original wire format.

#### Clone Commands

If a command's purpose is to copy information from one resource to another, it
**must** be suffixed with `:clone` and **must** take a `from` and `to`
argument:

    firebase example:clone <fromProject> <toProject>

To avoid confusion and accidental misuse, clone commands **must** explicitly
require both arguments and **must not** rely on project selection to populate
either.

### Deployment

Behavior that takes local state (e.g. a rules file) and applies it to the live
operation of a Firebase project **must** integrate with the `deploy` command.

#### Scoped Deployments

If a service has multiple deployable resources, it **may** allow specifying
which resources are deployed through colon namespacing, for example:

    firebase deploy --only functions:func1,functions:func2,hosting:site3

Colon namespacing **may** be used to identify one of many like resources (as
with functions above) or to identify specific resource type (e.g.
`firestore:indexes` vs. `firestore:rules`).

If the service integrates with [deploy targets][deploy-targets], the targets
**must** be addressable via colon namespacing.

[global-flags]:
  https://github.com/firebase/firebase-tools/blob/master/src/index.js
[deploy-targets]: https://firebase.google.com/docs/cli/targets
[aip-140]: ../0140.md
