---
id: 2510
state: approved
created: 2018-12-26
placement:
  category: gcp
---

# Project identifiers

Historically, Google had two kinds of projects: API projects and App Engine
projects. API projects used project numbers (e.g. `12345`) as identifiers, and
App Engine projects used project IDs (e.g. `happy-armadillo-789`) as
identifiers. Later, Google converged API projects and App Engine projects, so
now each project has _both_ unique and immutable identifiers.

The two types of identifiers are used differently in different contexts, and
create a lot of complexity for application development. One critical issue is
that applications cannot reliably join data from different services, because
different services use different project identifiers.

## Guidance

**TL;DR:** The project number is the canonical identifier, and the project ID
is an [alias][]; however, unlike normal aliases, it **should** be returned if it
is what the user sent. Additionally, third-party services are unable to
_accept_ project IDs.

The rationale for this is:

- Each resource should always have one canonical identifier.
- Because Google's privacy policy restricts the use of project IDs, both
  internally and with partners, only the project number can be the canonical
  identifier.
- However, even though the project number is the canonical identifier, a policy
  of returning it even if the user sent a project ID has proven to be
  unfriendly to both humans and declarative tools.

### Google APIs

Externally-facing Google APIs **should** accept both project IDs and project
numbers for incoming API requests.

However, even though the project number is the canonical identifier as
described in AIP-122, services **should** return whichever ID the user sent.
The reason for this is because automatic translation between user-friendly
project IDs and user-unfriendly project numbers has proven to cause real-world
difficulty for users, and also for declarative tools (see AIP-128 for more on
declarative-friendliness).

Two additional points:

- Error responses **must** return the originally-provided value without
  modification. Error responses **must not** perform any translation between
  project IDs and project numbers.
- If a service receives a resource name for a resource that the service does
  not own, it **should not** perform any translation between project IDs and
  project numbers for those resource names.

### Internal Google services

Internal Google services **must** use project numbers for internal data storage
and for output. Project identifiers are widely used as storage keys, which
often appear in logs and metrics. Project IDs are user-settable and thus
considered PII and user data, but project numbers are not.

Therefore, when an internal service calls an external Google APIs, it
**should** use project numbers for making API requests.

### Resource References

Project IDs also appear in [resource names][], which are used
when referring to a separate resource ([example][]).

In these situations, the value of the resource reference should be preserved
regardless if the user has sent a project ID or number to identify the main
resource.

For example, for an existing resource book:

```proto
book {
  // project-id: "foo"
  // project-number: 12345
  name: "project/12345/books/game-of-tones"
  shelf: "project/123456/shelves/top-row"
}
```

A request for the book in the format of `projects/foo/books/game-of-tones`
should return:

```proto
book {
  // Returning the project ID, since that was what was sent.
  name: "project/foo/books/game-of-tones"
  // The shelf still uses the project Number, since that is what
  // the user has sent. If the user has set a name with the project ID,
  // that should also be preserved.
  shelf: "project/123456/shelves/top-row"
}
```

Similar to how the guidance around project ID / project number is designed
to ensure that there is a minimal difference between user input and output,
resource references are also untranslated to minimize normalized user input.

[resource names]: ./0122.md
[example]: ./0122.md#fields-representing-another-resource
### Third-party services

[Third-party services](https://cloud.google.com/marketplace) that are
integrated with Google Cloud Platform **must** only store or provide project
numbers. Google's privacy policy prohibits sharing project IDs with third-party
services, or providing a service for third-party services to translate between
project IDs and project numbers at runtime.

### Project identifier format

Services **must** use project resource names as defined by the [Resource
Manager API][] to refer to projects, such as `projects/123456`. This allows the
same API to work with other resources similar to projects, such as
organizations and folders.

[alias]: ../0122.md#resource-id-aliases
[resource manager api]: https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/

## Changelog

- **2022-10-19**: Clarified guidance for project identifiers in resource references.
- **2021-07-29**: Reversed previous guidance on returning project IDs; this AIP
  now advocates returning what the user sent.
- **2019-08-11**: Add an exception for resources that a service does not own.
- **2019-06-19**: Clarify how error messages should be treated
- **2019-06-10**: Minor language and organization tweaks
