---
id: 2602
state: approved
created: 2019-06-12
placement:
  category: sdk
---

# Parameter-dependent arguments

When designing CLI commands, a common scenario is that a command corresponding
to some conceptual action may take different, largely non-overlapping arguments
depending on the value of a particular parameter.

For instance, suppose we're designing a new gcloud surface for managing images,
and we need a command that formats an image as JPEG, GIF, or PNG. Regardless of
the image format, the command will need arguments for the source and
destination files, but otherwise depending on the format, an entirely different
set of options will apply. JPEG, for example, might take arguments for
smoothing, subsampling, and DCT method, which are only relevant for JPEG
images. GIF, on the other hand, might take arguments for controlling animated
gifs e.g. whether to loop forever, and a delay time in between frames. Finally,
PNG might take arguments for color type and bits per channel.

## Guidance

When the parameter-specific arguments are numerous relative to the other
arguments, create a command group for the action, with separate subcommands
named after each of the parameter values. In the example above, we would thus
create a `gcloud images format` command group, with subcommands called `jpeg`,
`gif`, and `png`. These subcommands can then take their own format-specific
flags.

Example usage:

```
$ gcloud images format jpeg --help

$ gcloud images format jpeg --source-file=foo --destination-file=bar \
    --dct-method=integer --smoothing=0.1 --subsampling=4:4:4

$ gcloud images format png --source-file=foo --destination-file=bar \
    --color-type=0 --bits-per-channel=16

$ gcloud images format gif --source-file=foo --destination-file=bar \
    --loop-forever --frame-delay=1ms
```

It's possible that over time more and more arguments are added that are common
to all parameters. In that case, it may make sense to instead use a single
command that takes an argument for the parameter. This can be done without
breaking backward compatibility by making the parameter a positional argument.
In the example above, this would involve changing `format` from a command group
to a command, and having it take a positional image format argument which can
be one of: `jpeg`, `gif`, or `png`. Note that all the example commands above
would still function identically (except for the first one, but since it only
affects help text it's not considered a breaking change.)

## Alternatives considered

There are several other possibilities for the design of such a command,
outlined below:

### Single command with an explicit flag corresponding to the parameter

In the example, this would involve a `--type` flag to specify the image format:

```
$ gcloud images format --source-file=source --destination-file=dest \
    --type=JPEG --dct-method=integer --smoothing=0.1 --subsampling=4:4:4

$ gcloud images format --source-file=source --destination-file=dest \
    --type=GIF --loop-forever --frame-delay=1ms

$ gcloud images format --source-file=source --destination-file=dest \
    --type=PNG --color-type=0 --bits-per-channel=16
```

Conceptually it makes the most sense to just have a single format command.
However, this approach has several drawbacks:

- Unnecessary help text. The user will see all of the format-specific options,
  most of which will be irrelevant since they apply to different formats. In
  graphical image editing programs such as Photoshop or GIMP, the UI can
  selectively show these format-specific options once the user chooses the
  desired format from a dropdown. On the CLI, however, we have no such
  capability because the help text is statically generated.
- Additional logic needed for validation. Since some arguments will be invalid
  depending on the format, the command author needs to ensure specifying
  invalid combinations returns an appropriate error. While this can be
  accomplished with appropriately nested mutex groups, the nesting has the
  potential to become overly deep and complex.

### Multiple commands named after the action hyphenated with the parameter value

In the example, this would look like:

```
$ gcloud images format-jpeg ...
$ gcloud images format-gif ...
$ gcloud images format-png ...
```

This is similar to the recommended design in that each parameter value gets its
own command. However, there are disadvantages:

- Backward compatibility. If in the future it becomes desirable to make the
  parameter value an argument to a single command, this would necessitate a
  breaking change.
- It's less elegant from a command tree layout perspective. Grouping the
  parameter-specific commands into a command group allows for a natural
  decomposition of the command space, in keeping with gcloud's CLI design
  philosophy, and allows for
  [progressive disclosure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Progressive_disclosure)
  in the help text and in autocompletion.
